Monopoles From an Atmospheric Collider
Magnetic monopoles have a long history of theoretical predictions and experimental searches, carrying direct implications for fundamental concepts such as electric charge quantization. We analyze
in detail for the first time magnetic monopole production from collisions of cosmic rays bombarding
the atmosphere. This source of monopoles is independent of cosmology, has been active throughout
Earth’s history, and supplies an irreducible monopole flux for all terrestrial experiments. Using
results for robust atmospheric collider flux of monopoles, we systematically establish direct comparisons of previous ambient monopole searches with monopole searches at particle colliders and set
leading limits on magnetic monopole production in the ∼ 5 − 100 TeV mass-range.
Introduction – The existence of magnetically
charged monopoles would symmetrize Maxwell’s equations of electromagnetism and explain the observed quantization of the fundamental electric charge e, as demonstrated in seminal work by Dirac in 1931 [1]. The charge
quantization condition of eg = n/2, considering natural
units c = } = 1 and where n is an integer, establishes an
elementary Dirac magnetic charge of gD ' 68.5e. More
so, monopoles naturally appear in the context of Grand
Unified Theories (GUTs) of unification of forces [2, 3].
Despite decades of searches, monopoles remain elusive
and constitute a fundamental target of interest for exploration beyond the Standard Model.
Magnetic monopoles have been historically probed
through a variety of effects (see e.g. Ref. [4] for a review).
The searches include catalysis of proton decay (“CallanRubakov effect”) [5–8], modification of galactic magnetic
fields (“Parker bound”) [9], Cherenkov radiation [10, 11]
and ionization deposits due to monopoles accelerated in
cosmic magnetic fields and contributing to cosmic radiation [12].
The majority of monopole searches have relied on an
abundance of cosmological monopoles, as produced during spontaneous symmetry breaking in the early Universe
via the Kibble-Zurek mechanism [13, 14]. However, the
cosmological abundance of monopoles is highly sensitive
to model details, such as mass of the monopoles and
the scale of cosmic inflation expansion that could significantly dilute any previously produced monopoles. This
results in a significant uncertainty in the interpretation
of searches relying on cosmological monopole abundance
∗ igurosyuhei@gmail.com
†
rpl225@uky.edu
‡ volodymyr.takhistov@ipmu.jp
and an ambient monopole flux.
While many of the previous studies have focused
on ultra-heavy GUT-scale monopoles (i.e. ∼ 1016 GeV
masses), scenarios such as those based on supersymmetry exist with monopole masses M  1016 GeV, which
are often called intermediate mass monopoles [15]. Recently, reinvigorated interest in monopole searches has
been fueled by the identification of scenarios with viable electroweak-scale monopoles [16–21]. Sensitive
searches of TeV-scale monopoles have been carried out
at the Large Hadron Collider’s (LHC) ATLAS [22] and
MoEDAL experiments [23].
In this work we explore for the first time monopole production from collisions of cosmic rays bombarding the
atmosphere. Historically, atmospheric cosmic ray collisions have been employed as a flagship production site
for neutrino studies, leading to the discovery of neutrino
oscillations [24]. The resulting monopole flux from the
“atmospheric collider” (AtmC ) is independent of cosmological uncertainties, and this source has been active for
billions of years throughout Earth’s history. More importantly, this robust source of monopoles is universal
and potentially accessible to all terrestrial experiments.
This opens a new window in which to search for magnetic
monopoles and allows us to establish the first direct comparison between constraints on monopoles from colliders
and historic monopole searches based on an ambient cosmic monopole abundance.
Monopole production – Collisions between incoming isotropic cosmic ray flux and the atmosphere results
in copious production of particles from the model spectrum (see Ref. [25] for a review), as depicted on Fig. 1.
Focusing on the dominant proton p constituents, AtmC is
directly analogous to the traditional proton-proton (pp)
colliders such as the LHC albeit with a boosted center-ofmass (COM) frame. Unlike, conventional collider experiarXiv:2111.12091v1 [hep-ph] 23 Nov 2021
2
overburden
monopole
flux attenuation
detector
 cosmic ray
atmosphere
M
M
FIG. 1. A schematic of the magnetic monopole (M) production from atmospheric cosmic ray collisions.
ments that operate at a fixed energy, the LHC being ∼ 10
TeV-scale, the cosmic ray flux allows for the exploration
of new physics with AtmC over a broad energy spectrum
reaching monopole masses as large as ∼ 106 GeV.
For detailed analysis of AtmC monopole M flux
production we perform Monte Carlo simulations of
pp → MM processes, drawing on the methodology
of the LHC MoEDAL experiment [23, 26]. In particular,
we employ MadGraph5 (MG5) version 3.1.0 [27] simulation tools with NNPDF31luxQED parton distribution
functions [28] and input UFO files of Ref. [29] for each
incident proton energy in the COM frame. This procedure allows for an “apples-to-apples” comparison between
cosmic ray observations and collider searches.
We model monopole production in hadronic collisions
by tree-level Feynman diagrams appropriate for an elementary charged particle [29], as employed in LHC
searches [23, 26]. In particular, as depicted on Fig. 2, we
consider the traditional Drell-Yan (DY) production1
for
magnetic monopoles via quark-pair annihilation through
a virtual photon qq¯ → γ
∗ → MM, as well as photonfusion (PF) γ
∗γ
∗ → MM. We find numerically that
photon fusion always dominates over Drell-Yan production, hence all of our results are dominated by monopole
production associated with photon fusion. We note that
this methodology is in contrast to other new physics
searches with AtmC, which, in analogy with atmospheric
neutrino studies [24], have been primarily targeting meson decays [31–34]. Monopoles are also distinct in that
1 Recently, symmetry arguments within certain classes of theories
have been put forth that question Drell-Yan monopole production [30]. In this work we remain agnostic about this traditional
monopole channel and include it for direct comparison with existing searches.
Drell-Yan photon-fusion
FIG. 2. Diagrams for Drell-Yan and photon-fusion monopole
production processes in pp collisions.
they are strongly coupled. Hence, monopoles may have
large production cross sections that could allow a nonnegligible flux even when they are sourced by PeV-scale
cosmic rays.
A monopole pair production requires that the square
of the COM energy is s ≥ 4M2
. This necessarily leads to
highly boosted kinematics in the lab frame. The boost
factor relating the lab-frame and COM frame is γcm = √
s/(2mp), where mp is the proton mass, which leads to
γcm ≥ M/mp. Since the cosmic ray flux falls rapidly
with increasing proton kinetic energy, it is expected that
the majority of monopoles are produced near threshold.
The typical lab-frame energy for a cosmic ray collision is
therefore hEMi ∼ M2/mp.
For simplicity, we focus on a spin-half, gD = 1 and velocity (β-)independent monopole model2
. We have confirmed that qualitatively our final resulting limit comparison between different AtmC and traditional collider
monopole searches will not be significantly impacted
by this choice. Our analysis can be readily generalized and extended to other possibilities. The resultant monopoles are then boosted to the lab frame, with
Elab = γcomEcom + γcomβcomPcom cos θ where cos θ is the
angle of the monopole momentum relative to the proton
momentum.
From each simulation we obtain an overall pp interaction cross section σ(pp → MM)(s), which is then
used for comparison with data and setting limits. Since
lab frame distributions are primarily dictated by kinematics, the dominant uncertainty in this procedure (using tree-level Feynman diagrams to model strongly coupled theory with monopoles) is an overall normalization.
Hence, we employ our simulation results as a model of the
monopoles’ kinematic distribution, but allow the overall
normalization of the cross-section to act as a phenomenological free parameter σ(pp → MM) = κ × σsim, where
2 We note that the resultant cross-section is ∼ 10 times larger than
that of spin-zero model but ∼ 10 times smaller than that of spinone model [23]. The β-dependence of the model can suppress the
cross section by a factor of 2.
3
FIG. 3. Flux intensity of monopoles produced in the thicktarget approximation (see text) from the top-of-atmosphere
cosmic ray collisions as predicted by simulations and considering cross-section normalization of κ = 1. The net
produced monopole number is two times the event number
(pp → MM). Different monopole masses as well as Drell-Yan
and photon-fusion production processes are shown.
σsim is the simulation output cross-section and κ is a
constant independent of s.
The outlined procedure allows us to consistently and
directly compare different collider monopole searches by
constraining κ for different monopole masses, accomplished by taking the ratio of the limited cross section
and the simulation predictions at a particular energy.
We choose a conventional reference cross section defined
at √
s = 4M that is twice the threshold production energy. Considering that all incoming cosmic protons are
eventually absorbed in the atmosphere, the cross-section
calculated with simulations is convoluted with the inelastic cross section σinel and cosmic proton density [25]. In
Fig. 3 we show the resulting weighted AtmC monopole
flux event number for pp → MM as a function of relativistic kinematic variables βγ.
Flux attenuation – The above procedure yields
AtmC flux of monopoles that would be produced per
proton in a finite “thick target” at the top of the atmosphere (TOA). Accounting for the fact that the atmosphere has an altitude-dependent density, the TOA
proton flux I
TOA
p must be replaced with an attenuated
proton flux that depends on both the proton energy Ep
and height z (thickness of target),
Ip(z, Ep) = exp 
−
Z ∞
z
ds
λ

I
TOA
p
(Ep) , (1)
where λ = 1/[n(s)σinel(Ep)] is the mean free path of a
proton, and n(s) is the density profile of air taken from
the global reference atmospheric model [35].
Monopoles produced at z must then propagate to a
given detector at a height z0. In the continuous slowing
down approximation (CSDA) the energy of the monopole
is deterministic, with an initial monopole energy EM
mapped to unique final energy E0
M = Ef . This can
be computed using energy loss per unit length stopping
power dE/dx = f(E)n(x) for monopoles passing through
a medium of density n(x) from a point zi to a point zf
by solving
Z Ei
Ef
1
f(E)
dE =
Z zi
zf
n(x)dx (2)
for the final energy Ef . The result defines Ef (zi
, zf , Ei).
We note that f(E) = f(βγ), and hence the attenuation
for different monopole masses can be treated by a rescaling of Eq. (2).
Effects responsible for energy deposit of monopoles
traversing a medium depend on the monopole velocity, or
more precisely on βγ. We focus on monopoles with βγ &
0.03, as relevant for the detectors of interest. Hence,
we can reliably estimate the stopping power dE/dx of
monopoles passing through matter using the standard
Bethe-Bloch formula for ionization losses [25], applicable for quasi-relativistic and relativistic 0.03 . βγ . 104
kinematic regimes. At still higher energies monopole energy losses are dominated by photonuclear processes [36]
and are expected to grow super-linearly with βγ for
βγ & 104
, with an approximate scaling of dE/dx ∼ γ
1.2
.
This has the important effect of introducing an effective maximum velocity cutoff for propagating monopoles,
since any ultra-relativistic monopole is rapidly decelerated until it hits the plateau of the Bethe-Bloch ionization. The breaking effect from photon-nuclear reactions
ensures that any monopoles reaching the Earth’s surface
have βγ . 104 − 105
, with the precise upper limit being
dependent on the monopole mass.
The monopole intensity at a detector is then given by
IM(z0, E0
M) = Z
dEpdz T(E
0
M|EM)
× Ip(z, Ep) n(z)
dσ(Ep)
dEM
,
(3)
where I is defined in Eq. (1), T(E0
M|EM) is the CSDA
transfer matrix T(E0
M|EM) = δ

E0
M − Ef (zi
, zf , EM)

.
The pp inelastic cross section is a very slowly varying
function of Ep at high energies and can be approximated
by a constant value [25]. We may then factorize Eq. (3)
into two integrals
IM(z0, E0
M) = Z
dEp I
TOA
p
(Ep)
1
σinel
dσ
dEM
(4)
×
Z ∞
z0
dz
1
λ(z)
T(E
0
M|EM)e−
R ∞
z
ds/λ
.
The top line of this formula may be interpreted as the
primary flux of monopoles passing through a thick target, IT T (EM). We note that the number of monopoles
in this treatment is conserved, however their energy is
attenuated as they propagate through a medium.
Experimental searches – AtmC establishes a universal sustained monopole flux source that is available fo
4
all terrestrial experiments. As we demonstrate, AtmC
monopole flux can be exploited together with existing
data from historic experimental searches for ambient uncertain monopole flux to establish novel robust leading
limits on magnetic monopoles and their production.
For an experiment located at high-altitude compared
to Earth’s sea level, such as SLIM [37], the attenuation of the monopole flux by the atmosphere will set a
lower bound on the mass of monopoles that can reach
the detector site. Given experimental sensitivity threshold to monopoles at βmin, the detector’s signal intensity is then found by integrating Eq. (4) from β
0 = βmin
to ∞. Within the CSDA, for each fixed z at which a
monopole is produced, there is a well defined E
[min]
M (z)
above which monopoles will be travelling faster than the
cutoff β
0 ≥ βmin at the detector location.
Hence, the signal flux of down-going monopoles reaching the high altitude experiment I
high
M is given by
I
high
M =
Z ∞
zexp
dz
e
−
R ∞
z
ds
λ(s)
λ(z)
Z ∞
E
[min]
M (z)
dEMIT T (EM) , (5)
where zexp is the height of experimental site above sea
level. This treatment can be readily generalized to incorporate different zenith angles. Here, we treat σinel as a
function of Ep in calculating IT T . For the propagation of
the flux through the atmosphere, it is the lowest energy
monopoles that are most important. Thus, we approximate σinel = 40 mb, which is valid for 5 GeV . Ep . 104
GeV [25], in calculating the mean free path λ = 1/(nσinel)
in Eq. (5).
Deep underground experiments with significant overburdens, such as IceCube [10] or AMANDA [42], are
largely insensitive to atmospheric effects. Any monopole
that can penetrate the overburden will loose negligible
energy while traversing the atmosphere. Hence, the intensity of monopoles arriving at the surface can be reliably approximated by IT T (EM). For deep underground
detectors, whose column density of overburden satisfies ρ⊥(overburden)  ρ⊥(air), we instead focus on the
zenith-angle dependence of the intensity.
The resulting path length that a monopole must travel
through the overburden, `, for a detector with an overburden of depth d, is given by
` =
q
cos2 θz(R − d)
2 + d (2R − d) − cos θz(R − d), (6)
where R is the Earth’s radius. Using Eq. (2) we can
take zi = `, and fix Ef ≥ Ethr for the threshold energy
(or equivalently velocity βmin) of the given experimental
search. This defines E
[min]
M (cos θz). Including a zenith
5 10 50 100
108
1010
1012
1014
1016
Monopole Mass [TeV]
σref (s
=16
M2) [fb]
σpp upper limit SLIM
AM-II
RICE
IC Est.
10 100 1000 104 105
10-4
1
104
108
1012
1016
Monopole Mass [GeV]
σref (s
=16
M2) [fb]
σpp upper limit
ATLAS
CDFOPAL MoEDAL Pb
-Pb
FIG. 4. Comparison of novel monopole limits from cosmic ray atmospheric collisions derived in this work using historic data from SLIM, AMANDA-II (AM-II) and RICE experiments. Also displayed is a crude projection for a downgoing monopole search in IceCube experiment (IC Est.) defined by multiplying the sensitivity from AMANDA-II by a
factor of 200. Comparison is systematically achieved using
the common reference cross section for pp → MM defined
by κ × σsim(s = 16M2
), where the normalization κ is found
by comparing the simulation predictions to the derived constraints for each target experiment. Existing limits for collider
monopole searches by OPAL [38], CDF [39], MoEDAL [23],
and ATLAS [22] experiments are shown. We have further excluded monopole masses less than 75 GeV due to constraints
from Pb-Pb collisions that rely on the calculable Schwinger
pair production cross section [40]. Also displayed is the total
pp → X cross section, as parameterized by the COMPETE
collaboration [41], which sets an upper limit on the allowed
pp → MM cross section.
angle-dependent efficiency3
, (cos θz), the observed intensity at an underground experiment, I
und
M , corresponding
to an integrated observed intensity I
obs
M over a solid angle
3 The background of cosmic ray muons depends on zenith angle
and so experimental cuts are necessarily more severe for downgoing monopoles. Because the monopole flux is attenuated at
large zenith angles there is a competition between these two
effects such that an optimum zenith angle will be achieved at
intermediate values θz ∼ π/6 − π/3.
5
is given by
I
und
M =
Z
dΩ I
obs
M
= 2π
Z
d cos θz (cos θz) (7)
×
Z ∞
E
[min]
M (cos θz)
dEM IT T (EM) .
Using Eqs. (5) and (7) and the output of the simulations shown in Fig. 3 we can test and set limits on
monopole production cross section in pp collisions. Existing experimental limits on an ambient astrophysical
monopole flux4
include those from AMANDA-II [42], IceCube [10], MACRO [43], SLIM [37], NOvA [44], ANITAII [36], and the Baikal observatory [11]. We note, however, that some of these limits are not applicable to AtmC
monopoles produced in cosmic ray showers.
Experiments without very significant overburden can
achieve increased sensitivity by limiting the analysis to
up-going monopoles, which suppresses atmospheric muon
backgrounds. However, this implicitly assumes massive
monopoles traversing the bulk of the Earth’s interior with
path lengths on the order of thousands of kilometers
and is thus not applicable to AtmC monopoles. Therefore, we do not consider such limits from IceCube [10] or
Baikal [11] Cherenkov detectors that imposed a cut on
the zenith angle of the incoming monopole direction to
be up-going.
Searches sensitive to slow-moving monopoles with
βγ . 10 are also ineffective for probing AtmC monopoles.
This includes deep underground MACRO experiment
analysis focusing on β ≤ 0.99 monopoles [12] and that of
surface-based NOvA experiment focusing on β < 5×10−3
monopoles [44]. Analogously, AtmC flux is also highly
suppressed for ultra-relativistic monopoles, as can be
seen from Fig. 3. Hence, we do not consider limits from
ANITA-II focusing on βγ & 109
[36].
Analogously to the balloon-based ANITA-II [36], the
RICE underground experiment focused on detecting radio emission from in-ice monopole interactions albeit in
regimes relevant for AtmC monopoles with βγ & 107
[45]. At such large boosts the attenuation from the air is
negligible, whereas from the Earth it is substantial. We
reinterpret RICE limits for AtmC monopoles, multiplying them by an additional factor of 2 to approximately
account for the absence of up-going monopoles. In particular, we employ the monopole flux limits of Ref. [45]
for γ = 107 and γ = 108 and compare them to our simulation flux predictions integrated over the intervals of
γ ∈ [106.5
, 107.5
] and γ ∈ [107.5
, 108.5
], respectively. The
resulting novel limits are displayed in Fig. 4.
Particularly favorable for AtmC monopoles is the
SLIM nuclear track experiment [37], sensitive to lighter
4 We do not consider here searches focusing on GUT monopoles,
e.g. Super-Kamiokande [8].
mass monopoles due to its high elevation of 5230 m above
sea level. In setting limits we use SLIM’s constraint for
β ≥ 0.03 and therefore require that monopoles reaching the detector have βγ ≥ 0.03. As the search is for
purely down-going (cos θz = 1) monopoles, we employ
Eq. (5) directly together with the bound of I(cos θz =
1) ≤ 1.3 × 10−15 cm−2
s
−1
str−1
. We find that the
newly established bounds on monopoles from AtmC by
SLIM are superseded by collider searches at lower masses,
as well as RICE and AMANDA-II at higher masses, as
shown on Fig. 4.
Dedicated search for down-going monopoles has been
performed by the deep-ice South Pole AMANDA-II experiment [42]. For AMANDA-II analysis we take into
account the zenith angle dependence of the monopole
detection efficiency which we extract from their data
(see below). We employ the resulting constraints for
Cherenkov emission from a β = 1 monopole, and require
βγ ≥ 3 that corresponds to β ≥ 0.95. the down-going
monopole search of AMANDA-II imposes a cut on the
zenith angle and a cut in the space of cos θz and ΣADC,
a quantity related to the sum of the photomultiplier tube
pulse amplitudes. We infer the efficiency as a function of
ΣADC from Fig. 11 and the cut on ΣADC as a function of cos θz from Fig. 12 of Ref. [42]. The AMANDA-II
bounds assume an isotropic flux of monopoles such that
Φ ≤ C
 R
(cos θz)d cos θz. Extracting C and including
an appropriate zenith angle flux we then compute the
cross-section normalization factor κ. The results are depicted on Fig. 4. We find that AMANDA-II and RICE
establish comparable monopole limits when converted to
the reference cross section.
Conclusions – Magnetic monopoles are directly connected with different aspects of fundamental physics and
have been a prominent topic of both theoretical and
experimental investigations for decades. We have analyzed for the first time monopole production from atmospheric cosmic ray collisions. This source of monopoles
is not subject to cosmological uncertainties and is persistent for all terrestrial experiments. Using historic
data from RICE, AMANDA-II and SLIM experiments
together with monopole flux from atmospheric cosmic
ray collisions, we have established leading robust bounds
on the production cross section of magnetic monopoles
in the ∼ 5 − 100 TeV mass-range. We project that a
dedicated search from IceCube could potentially set the
best limits on monopole masses larger than 5 TeV that
lie beyond the reach of current colliders.
