The Standard Cosmological Model assumes that more than 85% of matter is in the form of collisionless and pressureless dark matter. Unstable decaying dark matter has been proposed in the literature as an extension to the standard cold dark matter model. In this paper we investigate a scenario when dark matter  decays and the  resultant particle  moves with  respect  to the dark matter. A covariant hydrodynamical model is developed in which the decay is modeled by the transfer of energy-momentum between two dark dust fluid components.  We parameterise  the  model  in  terms of  the  decay  rate  Γ and  injection  velocity  vi  of  the  resultant  dark  matter  particles.    We  apply the framework to study the evolution of cosmic voids which are environments with low content of baryonic matter. Thus, unlike baryon-rich environments, voids provide an opportunity to measure dark matter signals that are  less contaminated by complex baryonic processes.  We find that the growth of S-type voids is modified by the dark matter decay, leading  to imprints at the present day. This paper serves as a proof-of-concept that cosmic  voids can  be used to  study dark  mater physics. We argue that future cosmological observations of voids should focus on signs of reported features to either confirm or rule out the decaying dark matter scenario. Lack of presence of reported features could put constraints of the decay of dark matter in terms of Γ > H−1 and vi < 10 km/s.

 
The status of Dark Matter (DM) is as an open problemin modern physics. As DM is known to form the major-ity of the universal matter content, its presence plays aimportant part in cosmological modelling and observa-tions. Yet, constraints on the possible particle propertiesof DM via direct or indirect detection experiments havebeen inconclusive [ 1], and DM particles have never beendirectly detected in an experiment on Earth [ 2, 3]. Cos-mology and astrophysics offer a laboratory of sorts toexplore the effects of particle physics, [ 4] .In the standard cosmological model the source of thegravitational field is a perfect fluid and dark matter isoften modelled as a pressureless and collisionless weaklyinteracting massive particle (WIMP) which in the lightof experimental data (or rather lack of thereof) will needto be replaced with some other candidate [ 5 ]. However,it is well known that the standard Cold Dark Matter(CDM) model seems to be inadequate on sub-galacticscales (< 1 Mpc) [ 6 ]. This has motivated investigationsinto modifications to the standard model such as WarmDark Matter (WDM) which damps the production of low-mass objects, [ 7 ]. Alternatively, interactions in the darksector have been investigated in recent years. Models ofDM interactions include annihilation, scattering or de-cay (DDM) and offer simple extensions of the standardWIMP models which retain the desirable properties ofCDM while offering possible resolutions to known ten-sions and discrepancies between theory and observation,[1 , 6, 8]. Strongly self-interacting modifications to CDMinclude collisional DM suggested by [9 ] to account for flat ∗ earl.sullivanlester@utas.edu.au† krzysztof.bolejko@utas.edu.au density profiles of galaxy cores but ruled out by [ 10, 11];and self-annihilation with a quadratic dependence ondensity is prevalent in galaxy cores, [1 ], but must be care-fully contrived to avoid complete self-annihilation in theearly universe, [12 ]. Scattering processes such as DM-photon or DM-neutrino interactions have been shown tohave similar effects to warm DM models [6 ] while alsoproducing horizon-scale weak damping effects.The effect of DM physics on cosmological structuresoffers a way of using cosmological observations to gaininsight into possible interactions in the dark sector. Suchobservables include high redshift data such as cosmicdark ages and cosmic microwave background (CMB),[13 ], or low-redshift data such as the effects of dark mat-ter on galactic halos [ 1]. However astrophysical signalssuch as, for example, DM annihilation [ 14 , 15] have beenshown to be difficult to distinguish from signals producedby baryonic processes [ 16 , 17] making direct detection ofthe products of annihilation at best inconclusive. In-teractions could introduce additional effects that mightinfluence the overall evolution of the universe. These ef-fects, such as decay and scattering, could lead to energyor momentum flux, or viscosity making the fluid descrip-tion of dark matter imperfect [ 18 –20].The focus of the present paper is decaying dark matter(DDM) which has a linear density dependence and maydecay into two- or many- bodies with massless decay by-products, and may feature kick or injection velocities ofrelativistic order , [21]. Hence DDM may produce stan-dard model particles, photons or exotic smaller mass darkparticles or dark radiation, [22 , 23], and energy-injectionby cascade effects, [ 13 ], offering possible means of indi-rect detection. Unstable DDM is a natural developmentbeyond the canonical stable WIMP model.One of the primary benefits of DDM is the early-timecorrespondence of the model to CDM and consistencywith the CMB anisotropy spectrum while late-time ten-
Page 2
2 sions within the CDM framework such as the missingsatellite problem are offered potential resolutions by thelong life-time instability of the DM particle, [ 8 ], – as-suming a particle lifetime of order the current age ofthe universe or longer. In this scenario, the observedDM subhaloe underabundancy may be remedied by bothdecay into relativistic, [24 ], or non-relativistic daughterparticles, [ 8]. similarly, the correspondence of DDM withCDM at high-redshift offers possible alleviation to, if notresolution of, the observed tensions in H 0 as inferred fromCMB and Type-1 Supernovae data, [25 ], as well as the σ 8matter fluctuations, [22 ]. However, recent work on rel-ativistic single-species decay products have investigatedthe similarity of the induced bulk viscosity and modifiedcosmic acceleration with the negative pressure requiredof dark energy, [26 ], and the signals constraining DDMphysics may be degenerate to other model modificationssuch a modified Newtonian dynamics, [ 27] .The present work proposes to investigate the possi-ble decay of DM into other dark particles via the effectthis may have upon the growth of large-scale structure,specifically cosmological voids. Voids are chosen as theseoffer an unique environment with several efficacious fea-tures. The under-abundance of galaxies in these avoidedregions suggests an inhomogeneous DM under-density,[28 ], assuming a strong Light-to-Mass ratio, and there-fore cosmic voids will have less significant annihilation orself-interaction effects due to the quadratic mass depen-dency of these. Furthermore, these regions have minimalbaryonic contamination so that scattering and baryonicfeedback processes may be negligible. Thus, in cosmicvoid regions the only remaining particle interaction whichmay be introduced to modify DM and produce significantsignals, is decay.As voids are the complementary structure of the fil-aments and sheets of the cosmic web, realistic analysiscannot consider voids as isolated objects, [29 ]. The envi-ronmental dependence and hierarchical structure forma-tion of voids creates a complex morphology which mayconveniently be classified by the dominant evolutionaryprocess determined by the surrounds: either expansion orcollapse, [30 ]. Larger voids are observed to generally fitthe former scenario corresponding to a void-in-void en-vironmental configuration. The density profile of thesevoids rises smoothly towards the mean background den-sity and are classified as R-type in recent literature. Al-ternatively, the density profiles of smaller, S-type voidsexhibit a compensating shell suggesting a void-in-cloudtype configuration, [31 ]. In both the uncompensated andcompensated cases, there is a general trend of spheri-cal voids evolving towards a bucket-shape density pro-file, [29 ]. Furthermore, the smoothing of asphericities asunder-densities grow, [ 32 ], validates the approximation ofspherically symmetric voids. Though not explored here,the ellipticity of voids is an important measure of tidaleffects induced by the surrounding environment and of-fers an significant probe into cosmology and dark sectorphysics, [33 , 34]. Despite the intimate coupling of voidswith one another and the overall environment, the stan-dard first-approximation of an isolated, spherically sym-metric under-density is often adopted; we also do thishere since it offers an immediate quantitative and quali-tative appreciation of the effect of proposed dark matterdecay upon void evolution.As these cosmological voids are inhomogeneous andevolve non-linearly, [35 ], the cosmology must move be-yond the standard spatially homogeneous and isotropicFriedmann-Lemaıtre-Robertson-Walker (FLRW) model.Perturbative approaches may be employed but requirea stable background so cosmological back-reaction mayaffect the accuracy of these models, and furthermore,gauge issues may arise [ 36]. The Lemaıtre-Tolman-Bondi(LTB) class of exact spherically symmetric dust solu-tions to the Einstein equations are inhomogeneous butisotropic and are appropriate for simplified void mod-els as pressure is generally negligible until shell-crossingoccurs, [37 –41]. The Szekeres models are both inhomo-geneous and anisotropic, [42 ] and have been employed inthe modelling of cosmological voids. These methods arehowever constrained by the requirement of being metricbased. Recently, tetra-based methods have been devel-oped as an alternative to LTB models, [ 43 ]. The well-established semi-tetrad approach of the hydrodynamical1 + 3 covariant methodology has an intuitive fluid flowinterpretation, [18 ], and when taken to have local rota-tional symmetry (LRS) or silence (vanishing magneticWeyl and pressure gradients) offers a generalisation toth LTB models in certain limits [ 44, 45]. In this paperwe adopt a fully general relativistic hydrodynamical 1 +3 formulation with LRS, to which further simplificationsare imposed, see Section II.The decay effect is proposed to be modeled by the one-way transfer of energy-density via long-lifetime nuclear-like decay from a dust fluid comoving with the fundamen-tal observer (representative of the CDM, with baryonicmatter deemed insignificant and disregarded for the pur-poses of this model) into a secondary non-comoving fluid.This is intended to represent a simple exponential decayof the massive parent particle into a massive daughterparticle.The average relative spatial velocity of the second non-comoving dust generated by the decay induces an ef-fective imperfect fluid EM tensor in the frame of thefundamental observer. Tilted models wherein imperfectfluid effects arise have been studied in the literature, seeeg [46 ]. The presence of these imperfect terms corre-sponding to heat flux, pressure and viscosity induces non-FLRW effects such as shear or Weyl curvature (whichare identically zero for the FLRW models), which in turnmodifies the overall evolution of the cosmology and struc-ture therein. However, for small peculiar velocities theEM tensor approaches that of a dust with heat conduc-tion, investigated earlier in [47 ] where an explicit form forthe space-time metric was determined, and more recentlyin [48 ], wherein the momentum-transfer was interpretedas the effect of a non-comoving fluid with non-relativistic
Page 3
3 peculiar velocity, in accordance with the present work.The structure of this paper is as follows. In Section II,the tilted two-fluid, 1 + 3 covariant model is developedwhich leads to a governing system of PDEs for a set ofscalars once LRS is imposed. This system of equations isthen employed in Section III to model spherically sym-metric, isolated voids of the two types discussed above.The results of numerical analysis of this system are pre-sented and discussed, with an emphasis on the possibilityof using these results as an indirect means of constrainingDDM. Limitations of our model are also discussed, andthe article then concludes in Section IV
The fractional decrease in density near the edgeof the voids ∆ as a function of DDM parameters Γ and v i .Colors correspond to a minimal number of voids required todetect such a feature. We emphasise this should be treatedas a simple estimate obtained using a direct method basedon the number counts of galaxies within cosmic voids. Thiswas done by stacking voids of the same size and shape. Giventhat real voids are of different size and shape as well as aresubject to intrinsic variations in density profiles, the actualnumber of required voids is most likely much higher.
The aim of this paper has been to investigate the effectsof DDM on cosmic voids. We focused on cosmic voids asthey are pristine environments that are less prone to con-tamination by complex baryonic 
12 environments such as galaxy clusters. By targeting voidsone hopes to disentangle the observational signatures ofdark matter from those of baryonic matter. To this end,we have developed a novel method of modelling the de-cay of dark matter. In this model the comoving CDMcomponent decays into another dark particle with a non-relativistic velocity, thereby producing a secondary fluidwhich has non-comoving average spatial velocity inducedby the velocity of the produced daughter particles. Theeffect of this non-comoving secondary fluid on the evolu-tion of cosmological voids has been investigated.Recent work, [ 70, 71], has presented thorough analysesof the effect of non-comoving components upon cosmo-logical and structure formation. The present article hasattempted to further these works by suggesting unsta-ble DDM as a mechanism for producing non-comovingfluid components. Rather than the non-comoving veloc-ity distribution, we have explored the effect of the DDMparticle parameters on void evolution. The results of thisanalysis suggest that for S-type voids there is the forma-tion of a significant secondary substructure induced bythe non-comoving DM component produced via the de-cay.With further sophistication, the model proposed andpresented here may offer a contribution towards con-straining the unknown particle properties of DM, in con-junction with constraints determined by other means.Our method could be used to further constrain or dis-cover DDM signatures. For example, if no secondarysubstructure is observed than one could rule out com-bination of decay lifetimes Γ <H −1 0 Gyr and injectionvelocities of v i > 10 km/s. Our methods will allow us toput tighter constraints on DDM. As a preliminary inves-tigation, our goal has been to proffer cosmological voidsas a possible means of indirect detection of DDM, withno attempts made to constrain DDM particle candidates,nor to satisfy the possible thermodynamic relations whichwould be required for physicality, [80 ]. The present papergives a proof-of-concept that demonstrates that cosmo-logical voids can offer an indirect, observational meansto constrain properties of DM.
The vanishing of the effective pressure scalars p andΠ and heat scalar Q immediately follows in the limit ofV → 0. In this situation, the model reduces to the well-know spherically symmetric LTB cosmology. As men-tioned in the introduction, exact homogeneous solutionsfeaturing dissipative dust were found and analysed in[47 ]. Early research explored inhomogeneous dust modelswith heat flow, generalising the subclasses of inhomoge-neous and anisotropic Szekeres solutions [57 ]. However,as recently pointed out by [ 58] , the heat flow of dissipativedust models is inappropriate for standard CDM and late-time universe models, and is analogous to the energy fluxinduced in the observer frame by a non-comoving, non-relativistic peculiar velocity. The two-fluid tilted modeldeveloped here has produced an effectively imperfect to-tal EM tensor.Observational analyses of large-scale peculiar velocitiessuggest non-relativistic orders. It therefore seems validto assume a non-relativistic, non-comoving peculiar ve-locity ofsuch that γ ≈ 1, and the effec-tive pressure scalars p and Π become second-order andnegligible. The effective heat scalar Q, however, is not.The tractability of the mathematical model is further in-creased by assuming that the covariantly projected dotand prime derivatives of the effective pressures are alsofirst order and negligible. This is justified as the initialvelocity distribution is taken to be homogeneous, andhence, all terms featuring p or Π vanish.Starting from the initial conditions outlined above, thegoverning system of propagation equations, (17) – ( 21),was time-marched forward to the present day, z = 0. Theresults of the evolution of the S-type void is presented inFig. 1 and the R-type void in Fig. 2. The density profilesshown in these figures are normalised by the present daybackground density given by eq. (30). Figure 1 illustratesthe evolution of the S-type void over a range of decay-rates Γ and injection velocities v i . Overlaid in each plotas a red dashed line are the results of the evoltion ofthe density profile without decay, Γ = 0, and thus nonon-comoving second fluid nor effective heat/momentumflow (ie such a model reduces to the LTB model).The results summarised in Fig. 1 indicate that the heatflow associated with the decay leads to a formation of anew feature within a void. This structure may be inter-preted as an additional ditch-like underdensity adjacentto the edge of the void. 