The information content of the minimum spanning tree (MST), used to capture higher-order statistics and other information fromthe cosmic web, is compared to that of the power spectrum for a ΛCDM model. The measurements are made in redshift spaceusing haloes from the Quĳote simulation of mass ≥ 3.2 × 10 13 ℎ −1M ⊙ in a box of length box = 1 ℎ −1 Gpc. The power spectrummultipoles (monopole and quadrupole) are computed for Fourier modes in the range 0.006 <<0.5 ℎMpc −1 . For comparisonthe MST is measured with a minimum length scale of min ≃ 13 ℎ −1Mpc. Combining the MST and power spectrum allows formany of the individual degeneracies to be broken; on its own the MST provides tighter constraints on the sum of neutrino masses , Hubble constant ℎ, spectral tilt s , and baryon energy density Ω b but the power spectrum alone provides tighter constraintson Ω m and 8. The power spectrum on its own gives a standard deviation of 0.25 eV on while the combination of powerspectrum and MST gives 0.11 eV. There is similar improvement of a factor of two for ℎ, s , and Ω b . These improvements appearto be driven by the MST's sensitivity to small scale clustering, where the effect of neutrino free-streaming becomes relevant.The MST is shown to be a powerful tool for cosmology and neutrino mass studies, and therefore could play a pivotal role inongoing and future galaxy redshift surveys (such as DES, DESI, Euclid , and Rubin-LSST).Key words: neutrinos – cosmological parameters – large scale structure of Universe
The Λ Cold Dark Matter (ΛCDM) paradigm has remained at theforefront of cosmology for over twenty years, cementing it as thestandard cosmological model. Observations and simulations overthat time have largely strengthened the case for ΛCDM despite themodel consisting overwhelmingly of things we still do not under-stand – principally the nature of dark matter and dark energy. Whileunderstanding the former will most likely need significant contribu-tions from particle physics experiments, understanding the latter isa key goal for future experiments in cosmology. The next genera-tion of galaxy redshift surveys (such as the Dark Energy Spectro-scopic Instrument (DESI),1 Euclid ,2 the Nancy Grace Roman SpaceTelescope,3 the Prime Focus Spectrograph,4 the Rubin ObservatoryLegacy Survey of Space and Time,5 and the 4-metre Multi-ObjectSpectroscopic Telescope6) will map the positions of hundreds of mil-lions of galaxies. Determining the nature of dark energy is a majorscientific mission for these surveys. In ΛCDM dark energy is simplyEinstein's cosmological constant (resulting from a scalar field), but ★ E-mail: knaidoo@cft.edu.pl1 http://desi.lbl.gov/2 http://www.euclid-ec.org/3 https://roman.gsfc.nasa.gov4 https://pfs.ipmu.jp/index.html5 https://www.lsst.org/6 https://www.4most.eu/cms/ better data may reveal that dark energy is actually changing with time(dynamical dark energy) or that the requirement for dark energy isactually a symptom that General Relativity, on which these modelsare based, is incomplete and requires modification (the premise ofModified Gravity theories).The discovery of neutrino oscillation (Fukuda et al. 1998 ; Ahmad et al . 2001) provided evidence that neutrinos are not massless (as had been predicted by the standard model of particle physics). Thisdiscovery makes neutrinos of keen interest to particle physicists,as the origins of their mass and hierarchy could provide hints tonew physics. Particle physics experiments currently place a lowerbound on the sum of neutrino masses (denoted in this work by )of ≳ 0.06 eV. However, it is cosmological experiments thatprovide the tightest upper bound: currently ≲ 0.11 eV (95%confidence level (CL); Planck Collaboration et al. 2018 ; eBOSS Collaboration et al. 2020); by contrast the upper bound from particle physics experiment KATRIN is currently ≤ 1.1 eV (90% CL; Aker et al. 2019) (although unlike cosmological measurements this is model independent). The sensitivity to neutrino mass in cosmologycomes from the role neutrinos play in the growth of large scalestructure (LSS). The neutrino's characteristic free-streaming length,a quantity dependent on its mass, will wash out small scale structure.This effect can be quantified as a suppression of small scale modesin the power spectrum. Over the next five years surveys such as DESIexpect to be sensitive to ≲ 0.06 eV (95% CL; Font-Ribera et al. © 2020 The Authors arXiv:2111.12088v1 [astro-ph.CO] 23 Nov 2021
Page 2
2K. Naidoo et al. 2014) and therefore anticipate a first cosmological detection of a non-zero mass for neutrinos.Cosmolo  gical surveys have largely focused on two-point statistics,whether in real or Fourier space. While these methods are tried-and-tested, they fail to fully explore and capture all the informationcontent of galaxy surveys. This is particularly relevant at low red-shifts where the highly non-linear structure of the cosmic web isvery pronounced; here the distribution of matter cannot be fullycharacterised by two-point statistics and further statistical methodsare required if we are to fully extract all the information present.Such analyses are particularly timely as future data sets will probethe Universe with tracers (galaxies, quasars, etc.) at higher numberdensities providing a greater sensitivity to the cosmic web. Relevantstatistical methods include the three-point correlation function (theBispectrum in Fourier space; eg Gil-Marín et al. 2017 ; Gualdi et al. 2019), Minkowski functionals (eg Petri et al . 2013), the 1D prob- ability distribution function (Uhlemann et al. 2019), marked powerspectra (Massara et al. 2020), machine learning (ML; eg Fluri et al. 2018), and the Minimum Spanning Tree (MST; Naidoo et al. 2020) – The focus of this paper.The MST was first introduced to astronomy by Barrow et al. (1985)and has successfully been used as a filament finder for cosmic webstudies (Bhavsar & Ling 1988 ; van de Weygaert et al. 1992 ; Bhavsar & Splinter 1996 ; Krzewina & Saslaw 1996 ; Ueda & Itoh 1997 ; Coleset al . 1998 ; Adami & Mazure 1999 ; Colberg 2007 ; Alpaslan et al.2014 ; Beuret et al. 2017 ; Libeskind et al. 2018). The MST is the min- imum weighted graph that connects a set of points without formingloops. More recently Naidoo et al. (2020) investigated how the MSTcould be used to incorporate the cosmic web when constraining cos-mological parameters. However, unlike the conventional two-pointanalysis as performed by most galaxy redshift surveys, referenceMST values ​​cannot be calculated analytically and instead need to becalculated from simulations. Fortunately, this problem is not uniqueto the MST – conventional statistics such as the power spectrumand bispectrum cannot be computed analytically in the non-linearregime (for Fourier modes ≳ 0.3 ℎMpc −1 ) and hence require sim-ulations, as do artificial intelligence (AI) and ML algorithms (as wellas other algorithms used to measure non-linear features in the cosmicweb). This has created a growing demand for large suites of cosmo-logical simulations and the development of accurate emulators ascosmologists push to extract more information from the distributionof galaxies.The Quĳote simulations (Villaescusa-Navarro et al. 2019) weredesigned precisely for this use (ie to test new summary statisticssuch as the MST and AI/ML and to push conventional statistics tosmaller scales). In this paper we will use these simulations to measurethe information content of the MST. The simulations have previouslybeen used to conduct Fisher matrix analysis for the power spectrum(Villaescusa-Navarro et al. 2019), bispectrum ( Hahn et al. 2019), 1Dprobability distribution function (Uhlemann et al. 2019), and markedpower spectrum (Massara et al. 2020). In this paper we extend thisanalysis to the MST; in Naidoo et al. (2020) the MST was testedagainst measurements of the power spectrum and bispectrum for afew parameters (matter density Ω m , amplitude of scalar fluctuations s , and neutrino mass ) to test whether the MST adds new infor-mation. Fisher matrix analysis is useful in cosmology as it places alower bound (the Cramer-Rao bound; Rao 1945 ; Cramer 1946) on theuncertainty of cosmological parameters inferred from a given statis-tic. If the posterior distribution is Gaussian then the Fisher matrixconstraints will be realised; otherwise the constraints on any givenparameter will be weaker. This analysis is explored for parametersof the ΛCDM model (ie the standard model of cosmology ΛCDM+ massive neutrinos ). This will help determine the role that theMST can play in constraining parameters from the current and nextgeneration of galaxy surveys.The paper is organised as follows. In section 2 we discuss themethodology and data used. In section 3 we present the constraintsfrom components of the MST and demonstrate how including theMST together with measurements of the power spectrum improvesparameter constraints in a ΛCDM model. Finally in section 4 wediscuss the main results and their implications for cosmology andfuture surveys.
Minimum Spanning Tree StatisticsThe MST is constructed, in 3D comoving coordinates in redshiftspace, from the node catalogue. The distribution function () ofthe MST statistics is measured, where is the degree, edge length , branch length, or branch shape (Naidoo et al. 2020). An edge isa line in the MST graph, the degree is the number of edges attached toeach node, and a branch is a chain of edges connected continuouslyby nodes of degree = 2. For the branches we measure their length (ie the sum of the lengths of member edges) and their shape (ie thesquare root of one minus the ratio between the straight line distancebetween branch ends and the branch length – with this definition,straighter branches have ≃ 0 while larger values ​​indicate morecurved branches). Furthermore, to ensure () can be described by aGaussian distribution we remove the tails of the distribution function.We measure the mean of the cumulative distribution function (CDF)of () for the fiducial simulations and then measure the MST ()only in the region where 0.05 <CDF <0.95 (with the exceptionof where we include () in the range 1 ≤ ≤ 4). The publiclyavailable P package M ST (Naidoo 2019) was used toconstruct and measure the statistics of the MST.2.3 Quĳote SimulationsThe Quĳote simulations (Villaescusa-Navarro et al. 2019) are a largeset of -body simulations designed for quantifying the informationcontent of cosmological observables and for training ML algorithms.The simulations are constructed in boxes of length box = 1 ℎ −1 Gpc,using 512 3 dark matter particles and 512 3 neutrino particles (for sim-ulations with massive neutrinos). 

 Correlation matrices (left) of MST statistics and (right) of MST statistics and power spectrum multipoles. The components of the MST statistics (thedegree, edge length, branch length, and branch shape) are labelled and divided by dashed grey lines on the left. The matrix has significant non-diagonalfeatures. The most striking is the correlation between the edge length and branch length where there are several fading lines of positive correlation. Theseoriginate from correlations between branches formed from two edges, three edges and so on, becoming fainter for branches formed from more edges. For thedegree and there is virtually no correlation while there are correlations between and the two branch statistics length and shape. These correlationsappear to be strongly tied to = 2 presumably due to the definition for branches requiring intermediate nodes with degree = 2. Lastly there is a weakcorrelation between and and negligible correlations between other MST statistics (ie between and and between and ). The power spectrum multipolesand components of the MST statistic are divided by a dashed grey lines on the right. The correlation matrix for the power spectrum multipoles is shown to bestrongest diagonally, with the most striking feature being the positive correlations between multipoles. Correlations between the power spectrum multipoles andthe MST are negligible with only a small inverse correlation seen. This is consistent with expectations since smaller edge lengths should correspond to largerFourier modes.
Covariance MatrixThe covariance matrix is ​​constructed from Eq. 2 using data vectorsmeasured from 15,000 fiducial simulations. Fig. 1 shows the cor-relation matrix for the MST on the left and the correlation matrixfor the combined data vector of the power spectrum multipoles andMST statistics on the right. Unlike the correlation matrix for thepower spectrum, the correlation matrix for the MST contains sev-eral non-diagonal features. One of the most striking features is thecorrelation between the edge length and branch length whichshow'waves' of positive correlations between short edges and shortbranches followed by negative correlations and then positive correla-tion for longer edges and branches. These positive correlations stemfrom the correlations between branches formed from two edges, threeedges, and so on. For branches formed from more edges these cor-relations become weaker as branches formed from more than threeedges are rarer. Other correlations in the MST statistics appear tostem from branches, which by definition have intermediate nodeswith degree = 2. As a result we see strong correlations betweenthe degree and branch length. The correlation between branch lengthand shape is weak but indicates that longer branches are more curvedthan short ones. The correlations between the power spectrum mul-tipoles and MST are weak so adding the MST to () is beneficial.This is clearest for the monopole and edge lengths which show aninverse correlation between edges and Fourier modes; this is com-pletely consistent with the relation between Fourier modes and realspace. Furthermore the large scale modes of the monopole (the firsthalf of the data vector) show positive correlations with longer edges.This indicates that most of the large scale clustering information isstored in the large edges of the MST.
The one dimensional parameter constraints from the MST statistics individually and in combination with the power spectrum multipoles (measuredat redshift = 0). From left to right we show the constraints on the cosmological parameters of the ΛCDM model: Ω m , Ω b , ℎ, s , 8 , and . From topto bottom we show the constraints for the individual MST statistics: edge length MST() and branch length MST( ), then constraints from the combined MSTstatistics: edge and branch length MST(, ), with the addition of branch shape MST(,,) and with the addition of the degree MST(,,, ), and finallyin combination with the power spectrum: first showing the power spectrum multipoles alone ℓ=0,2 () (these are marked with blue envelopes for comparisonto the other statistics) and in combination ℓ=0,2 () + MST(,,, ). These are further subdivided for constraints involving the MST with different binningschemes bins : 200 bins is shown with a dark coloured error bar at the top, 100 bins is shown with slightly paler coloured error bars in the middle and 40 binsis shown with the palest coloured error bars at the bottom. These results indicate the significance that binning will have on the individual MST constraints; theyalso show that, regardless of binning, combining MST statistics with the power spectrum significantly improves constraints for Ω b , ℎ, s , and . 3.4.1 Constraints from the Minimum Spanning TreeIn Fig. 2 the individual and combined constraints from the edgelength, branch length, branch shape, and degree distributionsare shown using ,, and with bins = 200. The edge and branchlength distributions have constraints that are competitive with eachother but that in combination are significantly tighter. In augmentingthe constraints first with the branch shape and then with the degreewe see that much of the constraining power for the MST is containedin the edge and branch length distribution; the addition of the branchshape adds a modest improvement to the overall constraints (∼ 25%for cosmological parameters at = 0) but the addition of the degreeappears to provide a negligible improvement (∼ 1% for cosmologicalparameters at = 0).3.4.2 Combined Constraints from the Minimum Spanning Tree andPower SpectrumThe separate and combined constraints from the MST (using,,and with bins = 200) and power spectrum measured at redshift = 0 are shown in Fig. 3 (for the constraints obtained from differentredshifts refer to Tab. C2). The constraints obtained for Ω b , ℎ, s ,and neutrino mass are significantly tighter for the MST, while thepower spectrum yields better constraints onΩ m and 8. When the twoare combined, significant degeneracies are broken leading to muchtighter constraints than those obtained using either statistic alone.For neutrino mass the combination provides a 1 constraint thatis 2.26× tighter, for Ω m that is 1.17× tighter, for Ω b that is 2.38×tighter, for ℎ that 2.61× tighter, for s that is 2.29× tighter, and for 8 that is 1.1× tighter.The impact of the MST binning is explored in Fig. 4, where wedisplay the one dimensional constraints for the MST statistics (in-dividually and for different combinations) at redshift = 0 in com-parison to the power spectrum multipoles with different levels ofbinning. Larger bins are associated with poorer constraints but ineach case combining with the power spectrum still leads to signifi-cant improvements in the constraints, particularly for Ω b , ℎ, s , and . This highlights the importance of including the MST in futuregalaxy redshift surveys to test and constrain ΛCDM parameters andto determine the sum of neutrino mass – a key scientific goal ofmany future surveys.3.4.3 Sensitivity to the Neutrino Partial Derivative EstimatorThe partial derivative of the summary statistics as a function of neu-trino mass can be estimated using Eqs. 4 , 5, and 6. Fig. 5 compares theneutrino mass constraints Δ =√︃ −1 using the different estima- tors for the power spectrum and MST measured at redshift = 0 (seeTab. C1 for a full summary of the different estimators for differentcomponents and combinations of the MST statistics at different red-shifts). The intrinsic accuracy of the estimators appear to show thatless accurate estimators are associated with poorer constraints.

Using haloes from the Quĳote simulations we calculate the infor-mation content (from the Fisher matrix) of the MST statistics in a ΛCDM model. The Quĳote simulations are a large suite of -bodysimulations designed to test the information content of summarystatistics and to test AI/ML algorithms. In this paper we use a subsetof the full suite of simulations (summarised in Tab. 1), measuring thepower spectrum multipoles and MST statistics in redshift space onhaloes with mass ≥ 3.1×10 13 ℎ −1M ⊙ . The analysis presented in thispaper is based on the Fisher matrix formalism which considers onlysecond derivatives of the data vector, rather than a full exploration ofthe parameter space via for eg MCMC. Fisher matrices are limited inthe sense that they place only lower bounds (the Cramer-Rao bound)on the uncertainties of cosmological parameters; as such analysis onreal data is likely to depart significantly due to non-Gaussianities(see Hawken et al. 2012 ; Foroozan et al. 2021 ) .From the MST we measure the distribution of degree, edge length , branch length, and branch shape. In Naidoo et al. (2020) it wasshown that is the most constraining MST statistic. However, thisprevious analysis was based on COLA simulations of length box =250 ℎ −1 Mpc and limited to the most massive 5000 haloes. Due tothe size of the sample, the study saw only modest improvements of17% on the 1 constraints on Ω m and 12% on the 1 constraintson s . By using the Quĳote simulations we are able to expand thisanalysis to a wider set of cosmological parameters (Ω m , Ω b , ℎ, s , 8 , and compared to only s , Ω m , and ), over a larger volume( box = 1 ℎ −1 Gpc), and using a larger catalogue of haloes (of theorder of 10 5 ). In Fig. 2 the constraints from the MST are shown to bedominated by the distribution of edge and branch lengths, with thedegree adding very little information and the branch shape providinga moderate improvement overall.In Fig. 3 and Tab. C2 the MST and power spectrum constraints arecompared and combined. The power spectrum multipoles providemuch stronger constraints on Ω m and 8. On the other hand the MSTdominates the constraints on : at = 0 the power spectrum mul-tipoles gives Δ = 0.25 eV (1 ), the MST gives Δ = 0.13 eV(1 ), and the power spectrum multipoles and the MST combinedgive Δ = 0.11 eV – an improvement of a factor of ∼ 2.3. Forthe other parameters we find that combining the two sets of statisticsbreaks several degeneracies and thereby improves constraints on ℎ, s , and Ω b by a factor of ∼ 2.4 in comparison to the individual powerspectrum constraints. We measure the dependence on the number ofbins bins , showing that fewer bins will decrease the constrainingpower but that the inclusion of the MST will, irrespective of the binnumber, significantly improve constraints on Ω b , ℎ, s , and neutrinomass .In this paper we show that adding the MST to the power spec-trum greatly improves constraints for parameters of the ΛCDMmodel. In particular constraints on are dominated by the MSTsince it is significantly more sensitive to the effects of neutrinos onthe distribution of haloes. This appears to come from the MST'ssensitivity to the small scale clustering in the cosmic web whereneutrino free-streaming effects are important. Future galaxy surveyssuch as DESI, Euclid , and LSST are projected to bring the upperlimit on neutrino mass below or close to 0.06 eV (Font-Ribera et al. 2014), the lower limit from neutrino oscillations (assuming normal hierarchy). As we have illustrated using halo simulations the MSTcan improve by a factor of two the constraints on neutrino masswith respect to just the power spectrum. Therefore we can expectthe MST to provide greater constraints from current and future sur-veys, possibly enabling this interesting regime to be probed sooner.These constraints could be further improved by combining the MSTand the power spectrum with other probes such as the CMB. Thisdemonstrates the importance of measuring more than just the powerspectrum (or two-point statistics) and provides a powerful argumentfor making measurements of the MST on current and future galaxysurveys such as BOSS, eBOSS, and DESI. In future work we will lookto develop techniques for addressing the challenges associated withreal galaxy survey data; these challenges include the impact of thesurvey's selection function across the sky (completeness and depth)and as a function of redshift, the incorporation of galaxy weights, MNRAS 000 , 1– 11 (2020)
Page 9
Cosmology and neutrino mass with the MST9 and the mitigation of small scale effects including the effect of fibrecollisions in spectroscopic surveys.