On the Tidal Formation of Dark Matter Deficient Galaxies
ABSTRACT
Previous studies have shown that dark matter deficient galaxies (DMDG) such as NGC1052-DF2 (hereafter DF2) can result from
tidal stripping. An important question, though, is whether such a stripping scenario can explain DF2’s large specific frequency
of globular clusters (GCs). After all, tidal stripping and shocking preferentially remove matter from the outskirts. We examine
this using idealized, high-resolution simulations of a regular dark matter dominated galaxy that is accreted onto a massive halo.
As long as the initial (pre-infall) dark matter halo of the satellite is cored, which is consistent with predictions of cosmological,
hydrodynamical simulations, the tidal remnant can be made to resemble DF2 in all its properties, including its GC population.
The required orbit has a peri-centre at the 8.3 percentile of the distribution for subhaloes at infall, and thus is not particularly
extreme. On this orbit the satellite loses 98.5 (30) percent of its original dark matter (stellar) mass, and thus evolves into a
DMDG. The fraction of GCs that is stripped off depends on the initial radial distribution. If, at infall, the median projected radius
of the GC population is roughly two times that of the stars, consistent with observations of isolated galaxies, only ∼ 20 percent
of the GCs are stripped off. This is less than for the stars, which is due to dynamical friction counteracting the tidal stirring. We
predict that, if indeed DF2 was crafted by strong tides, its stellar outskirts should have a very shallow metallicity gradient.
Key words: galaxies: kinematics and dynamics – galaxies: formation – galaxies: individual: NGC 1052-DF2 – dark matter –
methods: numerical
1 INTRODUCTION
Recently, van Dokkum et al. (2018b) reported that the ultra diffuse
galaxy NGC 1052-DF2 (hereafter DF2), believed to be a member of
the NGC 1052 group, is dark matter (DM) deficient. In particular, its
inferred DM mass (𝑀h < 1.5 × 108 M at 90% CL) is smaller, by a
factor of a few hundred, than what is expected (𝑀h ∼ 6 × 1010 M)
based on its stellar mass (𝑀∗ ∼ 2×108M) and empirical models for
galaxy formation and evolution (e.g., Moster et al. 2018; Behroozi
et al. 2019). This inference was originally based on the extremely
small line-of-sight velocity dispersion (8.5
+2.3
−3.1
km s−1
) among the
10 globular clusters (GCs) that orbit DF2. Although inferring a mass
from this measurement has its shortcomings (Martin et al. 2018; Laporte et al. 2019; Hayashi & Inoue 2018), the inference that DF2 is
DM deficient has subsequently been verified by more sophisticated
Jeans modelling (Wasserman et al. 2018) and by the measurements
and modelling of the kinematics of stars and planetary nebulae in
DF2 (Danieli et al. 2019; Emsellem et al. 2019). Yet, the DM halo
mass, 𝑀h
, that one infers from the observed number of globular
clusters, 𝑁GC, based on the empirical 𝑀h
-𝑁GC relation of Burkert
& Forbes (2020) is 𝑀h ∼ 5 × 1010 M, which is perfectly consistent
with standard expectations based on the empirical galaxy formation models with stellar masses as observed for DF2. The inferred
★ E-mail: gogiya@uwaterloo.ca (GO)
luminosity function of these GCs, though, is abnormal, in that it appears offset towards the bright end compared to other galaxes (van
Dokkum et al. 2018c; Shen et al. 2021b). In fact, DF2 seems to have
several GCs that are comparable in size and luminosity to 𝜔-Cen, the
biggest and brightest GC in the Milky Way. To add to the puzzle, in
2019 a second galaxy in the same field, NGC 1052-DF4 (hereafter
DF4), was found to have properties that are remarkably similar to
DF2, including an inferred DM deficiency (van Dokkum et al. 2019).
The claim for DM deficiency depends critically on the distances
to DF2 and DF4. In two studies, Trujillo et al. (2019) and Monelli &
Trujillo (2019) claim that the distances to DF2 and DF4 are ∼ 13 −
14 Mpc, significantly less than the distance of ∼ 20 Mpc advocated
by van Dokkum et al. (2018b) and van Dokkum et al. (2019). If true,
this would make DF2 and DF4 far more ordinary, similar to nearby
dwarf galaxies, with no notable DM deficiency, and with normal GC
luminosity functions. However, recent analyses of the tip of the red
giant branch, based on deep Hubble Space Telescope photometry by
Danieli et al. (2020) and Shen et al. (2021a), seem to confirm the
larger distances, and thus the deficiency of DM in both DF2 and DF4.
The existence of dark matter deficient galaxies (hereafter DMDGs)
has long been anticipated. As first suggested by Zwicky (1956) and
Schweizer (1978), dwarf galaxies can form out of the tidal debris
(tidal arms) that form when two gas-rich galaxies merge together.
These ideas received little attention, though, until Mirabel et al.
(1992) reported the discovery of a tidal dwarf galaxy (TDG) forming
© 2021 The Authors
arXiv:2111.12104v1 [astro-ph.GA] 23 Nov 2021
2 G. Ogiya et al.
in the outskirts of the tidal arms of the Antennae galaxy. Since then,
the existence of TDGs has become well established observationally
(e.g., Braine et al. 2000; Weilbacher et al. 2000; Duc et al. 2000,
and references therein). Starting with Barnes & Hernquist (1992),
numerical simulations of gas-rich galaxy mergers have shown that
TDGs are expected to be DM deficient (see also e.g., Elmegreen et al.
1993; Bournaud & Duc 2006; Wetzstein et al. 2007; Ploeckinger et al.
2018). Observations of the HI rotation curves of some TDGs (still
embedded in their tidal debris) has indeed confirmed that their dynamical mass is comparable to their baryonic mass (e.g., Bournaud
et al. 2007; Lelli et al. 2015). Although it is unclear how common
TDGs are, Okazaki & Taniguchi (2000) have argued that if only a
few dwarf galaxies are formed in each galaxy collision, the expected
number density of TDGs could be comparable to that of dwarf ellipticals.
Clearly, then, it is tempting to interpret DF2 and DF4 as examples
of older TDGs that are no longer embedded in the tidal debris out of
which they formed. A key signature of such systems, though, is that,
since they form out of strongly metal-enriched material, they should
be outliers of the mass-metallicity relation. Such outliers are known to
exist and typically identified as candidate TDGs (e.g., Hunter et al.
2000; Sweet et al. 2014; Duc et al. 2014). However, spectra with
MUSE on the VLT indicate that both the stellar body and the GCs
of DF2 have low metallicity, in agreement with the mass-metallicity
relation (Fensch et al. 2019). This makes it unlikely that DF2 is a
TDG, motivating an exploration of alternative formation scenarios.
One such scenario was proposed by Silk (2019), who suggested
that DF2 can be the result of a mini Bullet-cluster event involving
a high-speed collision between two gas-rich dwarf galaxies. While
this compresses the baryonic gas, triggering the formation of overpressured dense clouds that are inducive to GC formation, the DM
components pass through each other and separate from the baryonic
material, thus giving rise to a DMDG. While this scenario plays out
in numerical simulations (see e.g., Shin et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2021),
the conditions that give rise to this formation channel should be rare,
making it unlikely that one galaxy group (NGC-1052) hosts two such
systems (DF2 plus DF4).
Another alternative formation scenario for DMDGs was proposed
by Ogiya (2018) and Nusser (2020), who argue that DF2 and DF4
might be extreme examples of tidal remnants. In this scenario, the
DMDGs start out as normal galaxies whose DM halos are largely
stripped off by tidal forces after they are accreted into a bigger halo
(in the case of DF2 and DF4 this is the host halo of NGC 1052).
Using high-resolution, idealized simulations, Ogiya (2018) showed
that, for sufficiently radial orbits, it is indeed possible to preferentially
remove DM from the satellite and create a DMDG that resembles DF2
(see also Yang et al. 2020; Macciò et al. 2021). A key requirement,
though, is that the progenitor has a cored DM profile. If DM is
self-interacting, such a core is a natural outcome (e.g., Spergel &
Steinhardt 2000; Elbert et al. 2015). In the case of Λ Cold Dark
Matter (ΛCDM), cores can be created due to processes that deplete
the central DM density, such as stochastic supernova feedback (e.g.,
Pontzen & Governato 2012; Di Cintio et al. 2014; Ogiya & Mori
2014). In fact, using NewHorizon, a high-resolution cosmological
simulation, Jackson et al. (2021) have demonstrated that the creation
of DMDGs via this mechanism is a natural by-product of galaxy
evolution in ΛCDM, and that the existence of objects such as DF2
and DF4 is therefore perfectly consistent with the standard paradigm.
In addition, there is observational evidence to support the notion that
DF2 and/or DF4 have indeed been influenced by strong tides (Montes
et al. 2020; Keim et al. 2021).
A potential key to deciphering the formation of DF2 is its extraordinary GC population, in particular its spatial distribution and abnormal luminosity function. One potential explanation for the overly
massive GCs might be that they formed due to GC-GC mergers.
After all, DF2 appears conducive to such mergers since the velocity
dispersion among its GCs is comparable to their internal velocity
dispersion. However, using high-resolution numerical simulations,
Dutta Chowdhury et al. (2020) showed that the merger rate is far
too low to explain the abnormal luminosity function. An alternative
explanation was put forward by Trujillo-Gomez et al. (2021), who
argue that the formation of DF2 must have involved a phase of large
gas compression, which might thus favour the mini Bullet-cluster
formation picture of Silk (2019).
The observed spatial distributions of GCs in DF2 and DF4, with
projected half-number radii of ∼ 3 kpc, also requires explanation.
Naive predictions based on Chandrasekhar’s dynamical friction formula (Chandrasekhar 1943) suggest that several of the observed GCs
should inspiral in a few Gyr (Nusser 2018; Leigh & Fragione 2020).
Unless they formed recently, which is ruled out by the fact that their
stellar populations are old (8.9 ± 1.8 Gyr Fensch et al. 2019), this
begs the question why DF2 and DF4 do not contain a nuclear star
cluster. A potential solution is offered by Dutta Chowdhury et al.
(2019), who used a suite of 𝑁-body simulations including multiple
GCs and found that scattering among the GCs acts as a dynamical
buoyancy force that counter-balances dynamical friction. In addition,
if DF2 and DF4 indeed lack DM, their cored distributions of stars
imply that the orbital decay due to dynamical friction will cease close
to the core radius due to an effect called ‘core-stalling’ (Read et al.
2006; Inoue 2011; Banik & van den Bosch 2021b). Yet, despite these
buoyancy-like processes, Dutta Chowdhury et al. (2019) find that the
population of GCs in DF2 should decrease its half-number radius by
a factor ∼ 2 in less than 10 Gyr. And that is without any DM; if DF2
has a non-negligible DM halo, the inspiral rate can be substantially
faster, especially if that halo is cuspy.
One of the goals of this paper is to investigate the evolution of the
GC populations in DF2 and DF4 in the extreme-tide picture. In particular, using idealised, high-resolution simulations, we investigate,
starting from a normal DM dominated dwarf galaxy, to what extent
the tidal forces strip GCs and impact their spatial distribution due
to tidal stirring, a term that we use to describe the impact of violent
re-virialization in response to tidal stripping and impulsive heating.
We also use the simulations to examine in detail the evolution of the
size and velocity dispersion of the stellar remnant. The overarching
goal is to examine whether tidal effects can transform a normal dwarf
galaxy into a DMDG akin to DF2 and DF4.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the 𝑁-body
simulations and the initial conditions. Section 3 presents the results
and demonstrates that tidal stripping is indeed a viable mechanism
for creating DMDGs with properties similar to DF2 and DF4. In
Section 4 we make some predictions for the internal structure of
DMDGs, and we summarise our findings in Section 5. Throughout,
where needed, we adopt cosmological parameters taken from Planck
Collaboration et al. (2016).
2 SIMULATION MODELS
We simulate the tidal evolution of a satellite galaxy, which is to represent a potential progenitor of DF2, as it orbits a larger host system,
similar to the DM halo of the NGC 1052 group. The simulations
cover the period from shortly before infall, which we take to occur at
a redshift 𝑧acc, to the present. The satellite galaxy is modelled as an
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)
Tidal interactions and DM deficient galaxies 3
𝑁-body system containing DM, stars and GCs, while a time-varying
analytical potential is employed to model the host galaxy.
Throughout, we adopt 𝑧acc = 1.5, based on the assumption that a
large fraction of the stellar mass of DF2 was formed prior to infall
(i.e., we assume that the galaxy quenched shortly before or after
accretion into the NGC 1052 system). Observations indicate that the
age of the stars and GCs in DF2 is ∼ 9 Gyr (van Dokkum et al.
2018c; Fensch et al. 2019), which is comparable to the lookback
time to 𝑧acc = 1.5.
Note that this improves on the 𝑁-body simulations of Ogiya
(2018), where it was assumed that 𝑧acc = 0, and the tidal evolution of the satellite was followed for a period of 10 Gyr. This is
important since orbital times at higher redshifts are shorter. Hence,
the approach taken here results in more peri-centric passages, and
therefore a stronger tidal impact (i.e., see Ogiya et al. 2021). In addition, in order to assess the impact of tides on the GC population, we
also run simulations in which the galaxy model evolves in isolation.
In what follows, we refer to the simulations with and without external
tidal field as Tide and NoTide, respectively.
2.1 𝑁-body galaxy model
The initial 𝑁-body system that represents the progenitor of DF2
consists of three components: a stellar spheroid, a spherical DM halo,
and a population of GCs. As detailed below, its structural properties
are taken to be representative of that of a ‘typical’ galaxy, which
means that it obeys the empirical stellar mass-to-halo mass relation,
has a size characteristic of the observed size-mass relation of galaxies
at the redshift of accretion, and has a median projected radius of its
GC population in agreement with observations of (isolated) galaxies.
2.1.1 Stellar spheroid
We model the stellar body as a sphere with a projected surface
brightness given by a Sérsic profile (Sérsic 1963), i.e.,
Σ(𝑅) ∝ exp 
−𝑏𝑛

𝑅
𝑅e
1/𝑛

, (1)
where 𝑅 is the projected distance from the centre of the galaxy, 𝑅e
is the effective radius containing half of the total luminosity, 𝑛 is the
Sérsic index, and
𝑏𝑛 = 2𝑛 −
1
3
+
4
405𝑛
+
46
25515𝑛
2
(2)
(Ciotti & Bertin 1999). The corresponding 3D radial density profile
is given by
𝜌∗ (𝑟) = 𝜌0

𝑟
𝑅e
−𝑝𝑛
exp 
−𝑏𝑛

𝑟
𝑅e
1/𝑛

(3)
(e.g. Mellier & Mathez 1987; Prugniel & Simien 1997), where 𝑟 is
the three-dimensional distance from the centre of the galaxy, 𝜌0 is a
characteristic density, and
𝑝𝑛 = 1 −
0.6097
𝑛
+
0.05463
𝑛
2
. (4)
(Lima Neto et al. 1999). Throughout, we adopt a total stellar mass of
𝑀∗ = 2×108𝑀, and a Sérsic index of 𝑛 = 1, which are comparable
to the present-day values of DF2. However, for the effective radius
we adopt 𝑅e = 1.25 kpc, which is the typical size of a galaxy of this
stellar mass at 𝑧 ∼ 1.5 (e.g., van der Wel et al. 2014).
2.1.2 DM halo
For the DM halo we consider two different spherical profiles: a
standard NFW profile (Navarro et al. 1997)
𝜌NFW(𝑟) = 𝜌s(𝑟/𝑟s)
−1
(1 + 𝑟/𝑟s)
−2
, (5)
where 𝜌s and 𝑟s are the scale density and scale radius, respectively,
and a halo with a central density core. The latter is motivated by the
observed rotation curves of dwarf galaxies (e.g. Flores & Primack
1994; Burkert 1995; Swaters et al. 2003; Walker & Peñarrubia 2011;
Burkert 2015; Oh et al. 2015) and by hydrodynamical simulations
that indicate that various baryonic processes can transform the NFW
cusp into a central core (e.g., Mashchenko et al. 2006; Di Cintio et al.
2014; Oñorbe et al. 2015).
Following Read et al. (2016) we model the enclosed mass profile
of the haloes as
𝑀DM(𝑟) = 𝑓
𝑚(𝑟)𝑀NFW(𝑟) . (6)
Here 𝑀NFW(𝑟) is the mass profile of a NFW halo, while
𝑓 (𝑟) = tanh (𝑟/𝑟c), (7)
is a transformation function that describes the potential impact of
baryons on the final DM profile. Here 𝑟c is a core radius, and the
parameter 0 ≤ 𝑚 ≤ 1 controls the significance of the transformation
process. In this paper we consider two cases: 𝑚 = 0 for which the
halo is an unmodified NFW halo with a central𝑟
−1 density cusp, and
𝑚 = 1 for which the cusp is transformed to a constant density core.
Throughout we assume that the mass of the halo (prior to any
transformation), defined as the mass that encloses a radius 𝑟200 inside of which the average density is 200 times the critical density,
is given by 𝑀200 = 6 × 1010𝑀, which is consistent with the expected halo mass for a galaxy with 𝑀∗ = 2 × 108𝑀 at 𝑧 = 1.5 (see
e.g., Behroozi et al. 2019). For the concentration parameter we adopt
𝑐200 = 𝑟200/𝑟s = 6.6, based on the concentration-mass-redshift relation of Ludlow et al. (2016). Finally, for the transformed model
(𝑚 = 1), we adopt a core radius of 𝑟c = 1.75 𝑅e = 2.19 kpc, as
suggested by Read et al. (2016).
Fig. 1 plots the initial density profiles of the stellar spheroid (orange) and the two DM haloes. Note that, in the case of the cored
DM halo (𝑚 = 1, solid black), the stellar density exceeds that of the
DM for 𝑟 <
∼ 0.1 kpc. Also, the cored DM density profile is consistent
with the empirical fact that the DM haloes of dwarf galaxies all seem
to have a central surface density, defined as the product of the DM
central density and the core radius, of ∼ 100 M/ pc2
(Kormendy
& Freeman 2016; Di Paolo et al. 2019; Burkert 2020, and references
therein). As shown in Ogiya et al. (2014), this central surface density
is a typical outcome of a cusp-to-core transformation process due to
potential oscillations driven by star formation feedback. In the case
of the cuspy NFW profile (𝑚 = 0, dotted black), the system is DM
dominated at all radii.
We draw the initial position vectors of star and DM particles
using their respective density profiles and the standard random rejection sampling technique. The corresponding initial velocity vectors
are stochastically sampled using the isotropic distribution functions,
𝑓 = 𝑓 (𝐸), numerically computed using the Eddington formula (Eddington 1916) while accounting for the combined gravitational potential of the stellar spheroid and the DM halo.
2.1.3 GCs
We select ten star particles and model them as GC particles in the
simulations. The selection procedure is as follows. First, we pick a
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)
4 G. Ogiya et al.
core (m=1)
cusp (m=0)
stars
ρ [M
⊙
/
k
p
c
3] 10
4
10
5
10
6
10
7
10
8
10
9
10
10
r [kpc]
0.01 0.1 1 10
Figure 1. Initial density profile of the 𝑁 -body satellite galaxy. Black and
orange lines correspond to the DM halo and stellar spheroid, respectively.
Note that we consider two different DM halos: a standard, cuspy NFW profile
with 𝑚 = 0 (black dotted line) and a cored profile with 𝑚 = 1 (black solid
line).
radius 𝑟GC, and select the 10 star particles whose distance 𝑟 with
respect to the centre of mass are closest to 𝑟GC. We then set the
masses of those particles to be 106 M, in rough agreement with
the average GC mass in DF2 (van Dokkum et al. 2018c), while their
position and velocity vectors are unchanged from those drawn by the
random rejection sampling technique.
While it may seem strange to initialize all GCs at virtually identical
galacto-centric distances, this approach has several advantages. First
of all, we only need a single scalar (𝑟GC) to quantify the initial
conditions for the GCs. Secondly, by construction, and in the absence
of dynamical friction, the GCs are in equilibrium with the stars and
DM. In addition, because of their dispersion in velocities, the GC
particles rapidly spread out over several kpc (i.e., they take on a more
realistic radial distribution) in a timescale of <
∼ 100 Myr, which is
much shorter than the simulation time or the orbital time within the
host halo. In fact, after ∼ 100 Myr their projected number density
distribution along any random orientation angle is well fit by a Sérsic
profile with 𝑛 = 0.5 and an effective radius 𝑅e,GC = 2.0 kpc. For
comparison, the observed number density distributions of GCs are
typically well fit by Sérsic profiles with 𝑛 ∼ 0.5−4 (e.g. Kartha et al.
2014; Hargis & Rhode 2014; Kartha et al. 2016; Voggel et al. 2016).
Hence, the GC distribution in our simulations is not unrealistic,
despite the somewhat artificial initialization.
In typical galaxies, the characteristic radius of the GC population,
𝑅e,GC is proportional to the effective radius of the host galaxy, albeit
with an appreciable amount of scatter (e.g., Forbes 2017; Hudson &
Robison 2018). Given that the effective radii of galaxies are proportional to their halo virial radii (e.g., Kravtsov 2013), we thus expect
that 𝑅e,GC ∝ 𝑀
1/3
200 . Indeed, Forbes (2017) shows that
log 
𝑅e,GC
kpc 
=
1
3
log 
𝑀200
1012 M

+ 0.9 (8)
provides a good match to observational data. Using that our model
satellite at infall has 𝑀200 = 6 × 1010 M, we infer that 𝑅e,GC ∼
3.1 kpc. This is somewhat larger than the 𝑅e,GC = 2.0 kpc of our
initial distribution, but the scaling relation between 𝑅e,GC and 𝑀200
has an appreciable amount of scatter, and several systems are know
that are significantly more massive than DF2 but with comparable
𝑅e,GC (see Forbes 2017). We briefly discuss this issue in more detail
in Appendix B.
2.2 Host galaxy
We model the host halo, roughly representing the DM halo of the
NGC 1052 group, using an analytical, time-varying NFW potential.
The NFW halo (assumed to be spherical) is fully specified by two
parameters; the virial mass, 𝑀200,host, and the concentration parameter 𝑐host. Each timestep in our Tide simulations we update these
structural parameters using the model for the mass assembly history of DM haloes by Correa et al. (2015) and the concentrationmass-redshift relation by Ludlow et al. (2016). Briefly, the host
mass grows roughly as 𝑀200,host ∝ 𝑧
−0.7 until 𝑧 ∼ 0.7, at which
point 𝑀200,host ∼ 7 × 1012 M, followed by a reduced growth rate
(𝑀200,host ∝ 𝑧
−0.1
) until it reaches 𝑀200,host = 1.1 × 1013𝑀 at the
present time. At 𝑧 = 1.5, when we start our simulation, the host halo
mass has grown to be ∼ 3.5 × 1012 M, about one-third of its final
𝑧 = 0 mass. Note that the latter is motivated by the inferred stellar
mass (∼ 1011 M) of NGC 1052 (Forbes et al. 2017) and the empirical stellar-to-halo mass relation of Moster et al. (2013). Finally,
the halo concentration increases almost linearly with time from 4.8
at 𝑧 = 1.5 to 6.8 at 𝑧 = 0.
2.3 Satellite Orbit
Since the host halo is assumed to be spherical, the orbit of the satellite
galaxy is planar and specified by two parameters: the orbital energy
𝐸, and orbital angular momentum, 𝐿. We quantify their values with
the use of two dimensionless numbers,
𝑥c ≡ 𝑟c (𝐸)/𝑟200,host(𝑧acc) , (9)
and
𝜂 ≡ 𝐿/𝐿c (𝐸) . (10)
Here 𝑟c (𝐸) and 𝐿c (𝐸) are the radius and angular momentum of a
circular orbit of energy 𝐸, and 𝑟200,host(𝑧acc) is the virial radius of
the host halo at the time of accretion. Smaller values of 𝑥c and 𝜂
imply an orbit that is more tightly bound and more radial (i.e., 𝜂 = 0
and 1 correspond to purely radial and circular orbits, respectively).
Cosmological 𝑁-body simulations have shown that the distributions of 𝑥c and 𝜂 of subhaloes at infall are broad, with peaks around
1.2 and 0.6, respectively (e.g. Tormen 1997; Zentner et al. 2005;
Khochfar & Burkert 2006; Wetzel 2011; Jiang et al. 2015; van den
Bosch et al. 2018; Li et al. 2020). In our Tide simulations we want
to pick orbital parameters for which the tidal stripping is sufficiently
strong such that the tidal remnant roughly resembles a DMDG akin
to DF2 and DF4. After some trial and error (see Appendix A), we
settled for 𝑥c = 1.0 and 𝜂 = 0.3. Although our simulations are thus
tuned to produce a system that resembles DF2 (in a sense that is
described below), we emphasize that these orbital parameters are by
no means extreme. In particular, sampling a large number of orbits
from the PDF 𝑃(𝑥c, 𝜂) of orbital parameters of subhaloes at infall of
Jiang et al. (2015), and analytically computing their peri-centres, we
find that the peri-centre of our orbit corresponds to the 8.3 percentile
of the distribution.
At the beginning of the simulations, corresponding to 𝑧 = 1.5, the
centre of the 𝑁-body satellite system is positioned at the apocentre
of its orbit with respect to the host halo with zero radial velocity.
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)
Tidal interactions and DM deficient galaxies 5
The apocentric radius and corresponding tangential bulk velocity are
computed using the orbit parameters and the temporal (at 𝑧 = 1.5)
properties of the host halo. Throughout the simulation the centre of
the host potential is fixed at the origin. The satellite crosses the virial
radius of the host system for the first time at 𝑧 ≈ 1.2.
2.4 Numerical parameters
All simulations, Tide and NoTide, are run using an 𝑁-body code
that uses an oct-tree algorithm (Barnes & Hut 1986) to compute
the gravitational force on each particle, accelerated with Graphics
Processing Units (Ogiya et al. 2013). The stellar spheroid and DM
halo of the 𝑁-body system are modelled with 49,990 and 15,000,000
particles, respectively, resulting in a mass resolution of ∼ 4, 000M.
Unless stated otherwise, we adopt a Plummer (Plummer 1911) force
softening with softening parameter 𝜖 = 14 pc and the cell opening
criteria of Springel (2005) with the parameter controlling the force
accuracy 𝛼 = 0.01. Timesteps for our second-order Leapfrog scheme
are updated following the prescription of Power et al. (2003) and are
equal for all particles. Based on a number of tests with different
numbers of particles (i.e., mass resolution) and different force softening we conclude that our simulations are numerically converged.
In addition, all Tide simulations satisfy the numerical criteria of
van den Bosch & Ogiya (2018) assessing the reliability of simulated
substructures. When analyzing the simulations, the centre and bulk
velocity of the 𝑁-body system are tracked using the iterative method
outlined in van den Bosch et al. (2018).
3 RESULTS
In this section, we study the role of tidal interactions in forming
DMDGs. The results from Tide simulations, in which the 𝑁-body
galaxy model orbits the potential of the host halo, are compared to
those from NoTide simulations, in which the 𝑁-body galaxy model
is evolved in isolation. Throughout, the GCs of the satellite model are
initialised using 𝑟GC = 2.5 kpc, and all Tide simulations adopt the
same orbital parameters (𝑥c = 1.0 and 𝜂 = 0.3). The only parameter
that we vary is the shape parameter 𝑚, which characterises the central
density structure of the DM halo of the satellite galaxy (𝑚 = 0 for
a cuspy profile, and 𝑚 = 1 for a cored profile, see Fig. 1). All other
structural parameters (e.g., initial mass, size, halo concentration, and
Sérsic index) of both host and satellite are kept fixed to the values
discussed in § 2.
3.1 Orbital evolution and mass loss
The top panel of Fig. 2 shows the evolution of the host halo-centric
distance, 𝑑gal, of the centre-of-mass of the satellite galaxy in our
Tide simulation. Solid and dashed curves correspond to 𝑚 = 1 and
𝑚 = 0, respectively, though their 𝑑gal(𝑡) curves are indistinguishable.
Note that the apocenter of the orbit decreases with time. This is not
a consequence of dynamical friction, which is not included (i.e., the
host halo is an analytical potential), nor of self-friction due to torques
from the satellite’s own tidally stripped material (Fujii et al. 2006;
Fellhauer & Lin 2007) which is negligbly small in our case (see
Ogiya et al. 2019; Miller et al. 2020). Rather, this shrinking of the
orbital extent is simply a consequence of the fact that the host halo
is growing (adiabatically) in mass, as described in § 2.2.
The middle panel of Fig. 2 shows that the DM mass is rapidly
reduced at each pericentric passage where the satellite galaxy feels
the strongest tidal force. Prior to the third pericentric passage, there
cored profile (m=1)
cuspy profile (m=0)
dgal [k
p
c] 0
100
200
300
400
M
D
M [M
⊙] 10
9
10
10
10
11
cyan: detectable
blue: bound
Mstar [M
⊙] 10
8
1.2×10
8
1.4×10
8
1.6×10
8
1.8×10
8
2×10
8
time [Gyr] −8 −6 −4 −2 0
Figure 2. Orbital and mass evolution of the 𝑁 -body satellite galaxy in Tide
simulations. Solid and dashed lines show the results from simulations with a
cored DM halo (𝑚 = 1) and a cuspy NFW halo (𝑚 = 0), respectively. Top
panel: distance from the centre of the host halo to the centre-of-mass of the
satellite galaxy. Note that the two satellites with different halos have virtually
identical orbits within their host. Middle panel: DM mass that is bound to the
satellite as function of time. Note how at late times the tidal forces of the host
halo strip more matter from the cored system than from its cuspy equivalent.
Bottom panel: stellar mass that is bound to the satellite (𝑀∗, blue curves) and
the detectable stellar mass (𝑀obs
∗
, cyan curves). For the latter, the errorbars
indicate the 15-85 percentile range for the values obtained using 100 random
orientation angles. See text for discussion.
is no evident difference in the DM mass loss history between the two
models. This is because the DM mass is preferentially removed from
the halo outskirt where the density structure of the two models is
almost identical (Fig. 1). At later times, though, the satellite with a
central cusp (𝑚 = 0, dashed line) experience less mass loss than its
cored equivalent, simply because the former is more resilient to tides
(see e.g., Peñarrubia et al. 2010). After 10Gyr of evolution, the cored
(cuspy) satellite has lost 98.5 (96.7) percent of its initial DM mass.
Note that these are lower limits, since in reality dynamical friction
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)
6 G. Ogiya et al.
(absent in our simulations) would have made the satellite sink further
towards the centre of the host halo, where the tidal forces are stronger.
Next, we discuss the evolution of the satellite’s stellar mass. Whenever we compute this stellar mass we include the contribution from
the GCs. We emphasize, though, that the combined mass of the ten
GCs only accounts for five percent of the total stellar mass, and excluding the GCs from the stellar mass therefore has no significant
impact on any of our results.
In addition to the bound stellar mass, 𝑀∗, we also determine an
estimate of the detectable stellar mass, 𝑀obs
∗
, which is more reminiscent of what an observer would measure. We do so as follows. We
project the distribution of star particles onto a plane along a randomly
chosen orientation axis, which we register on a 2D rectangular grid
with pixels that are 50 pc × 50 pc in size. We convert the projected
number density into a surface brightness assuming a mass-to-light
ratio of 𝑀/𝐿 = 2(𝑀/𝐿) and a distance of 20 Mpc, similar to what
van Dokkum et al. (2018b) assumed for DF2. The detectable mass,
𝑀obs
∗
, is then defined as coming from those pixels that have a surface
brightness exceeding 29 magn/arcsec2
, similar to the detection limit
of the Dragonfly Telephoto Array used by van Dokkum et al. (2018b),
and that are within 10kpc from the projected centre of the galaxy. For
each simulation output we repeat this procedure 100 times, for 100
different random orientation directions, which we use to estimate the
error on 𝑀obs
∗
. The blue and cyan lines in the lower panel of Fig. 2
show the evolution of 𝑀∗ and 𝑀obs
∗
, respectively. The error bars on
the latter represent the 15-85 percentiles of the distribution obtained
from the 100 orientation directions, while the lines show the median.
The bound and detectable stellar masses are in good agreement. Both
with and without a cusp, the stellar mass of the satellite galaxy is unaffected by the tides until the third pericentric passage (𝑡 ∼ −4.5Gyr),
after which it starts to decline following each subsequent pericentric
passage. After 10 Gyr of evolution the detectable stellar mass has
declined from 2 × 108 M to ∼ 1.4 × 108 M (a reduction of 30
percent) in the case with a cored DM halo, and to ∼ 1.8 × 108 M (a
reduction of 10 percent) in the case of a cuspy DM halo.
In what follows we refer to the Tide simulation with a cored DM
halo as our reference run.
3.2 Evolution of galaxy properties
Fig. 3 shows how the tidal forces impact the effective radius 𝑅e
(upper panels) and the line-of-sight velocity dispersion 𝜎star of the
stellar body (lower panels). Here, 𝑅e is defined as the projected
distance from the centre of the galaxy that encloses 𝑀obs
∗
/2, and
𝜎star is the line-of-sight velocity dispersion for the stars within 𝑅e.
The lines show the median values obtained from our 100 random
viewing angle, while the errorbars mark the 15-85 percentiles. Leftand right-hand panels show the results in the cases where the DM
halo of the satellite galaxy has a central core (𝑚 = 1) and a central
cusp (𝑚 = 0). The blue and orange lines show the results obtained
from the Tide and NoTide simulations. Note that the latter reveals
no noticeable changes with time, indicating that, in the absence of
tidal forces, the system is in dynamical equilibrium. For comparison,
the horizontal dashed lines and the shaded regions indicate the 𝑅e
and 𝜎star of DF2 and their uncertainties.
During each peri-centric passage, which are roughly spaced 2-1.5
Gyr apart1
, the effective radius of the stellar body first undergoes a
small decrease, followed by a larger increase, sometimes associated
1 Due to the growth of the host potential, the orbital period slowly decreases
with time.
with some oscillation in 𝑅e. The net trend is such that the stellar body
‘puffs-up’ over time. The line-of-sight velocity dispersion reveals a
similar, but opposite trend; it first increases slightly, after which it
decreases, such that over time the stellar body becomes colder. These
are the hallmarks of tidal stripping and impulsive heating. Both are
present, and both have a similar impact.
At peri-center, the tidal radius, defined as the satellite-centric radius where the force from the host halo is equal to that due to the
satellite, is smallest. To good approximation, the material outside of
this ‘peri-tidal’ radius2
is stripped off during a short time-interval following peri-centric passage (see e.g., Peñarrubia et al. 2010; Ogiya
et al. 2019, and references therein). Following this mass stripping, the
system is out of equilibrium and undergoes re-virialization during
which it expands. The energy needed for increasing the (negative)
potential energy is taken from the kinetic energy, which explains why
the velocity dispersion declines.
In addition to this purely tidal process, the high-speed pericentric
encounter also transfers orbital energy into internal kinetic energy
of the satellite system (impulsive heating). Due to the negative heat
capacity of a gravitational system (Binney & Tremaine 2008), it
responds by transferring kinetic into potential energy, to the extent
that the final kinetic energy is lower than the initial value (i.e., the
injection of heat has resulted in a colder system). During this revirialization the kinetic energy is transferred to potential energy,
causing the system to expand. This process is often referred to as
tidal shocking (Gnedin et al. 1999; Gnedin & Ostriker 1999).
Which of the two processes dominates, tidal stripping or tidal
shocking, depends on the orbit, with tidal shocking become more
important for more radial orbits (van den Bosch et al. 2018). For the
purpose of this paper, all that matters is that both processes conspire to
puff-up the stellar body of our satellite galaxy, while simultaneously
lowering its velocity dispersion. As a consequence, after ∼ 10 Gyr
the stellar body in the cored halo has an effective radius and line-ofsight velocity dispersion that are comparable to the values observed
in DF2. Although we tuned the orbital circularity to achieve this,
the main point is that DF2-like galaxies can be created with tidal
interactions starting from a ‘normal’ galaxy.
In the case where the DM halo has a central cusp (right-hand
panels), the trend is the same as for a cored halo, but the effect is
significantly weaker. Due to the deeper potential well associated with
the central cusp, the system is more resilient to tidal effects.
3.3 Towards Dark Matter Deficiency
The upper panel of Fig. 4 plots the evolution of the stellar (orange
curve) and DM (green curve) masses enclosed within a radius of
2.7 kpc, which is the inferred three-dimensional half-light radius of
DF2 (Danieli et al. 2019). Note that although the total stellar mass remains constant during the first three pericentric passages (cf., Fig 2),
the stellar mass enclosed within 2.7kpc slightly decreases during each
pericentric passage. This is a consequence of tidal stirring. Note also,
that the DM mass enclosed within the same radius decreases much
more rapidly, which is simply a consequence of the fact that the DM
is less tightly bound.
The lower panel plots the ratio of the enclosed DM mass to the
enclosed stellar mass. The gray-shaded region indicates the 95%
confidence region on this mass ratio using the constraints on the
enclosed stellar mass and the total enclosed dynamical mass from
2 Following van den Bosch et al. (2018) we refer to the tidal radius at pericenter as the peri-tidal radius.
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)
Tidal interactions and DM deficient galaxies 7
cored profile (m=1)
Tide
NoTide
Re [k
p
c] 0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
cuspy profile (m=0)
σstar [k
m
/
s] 0
10
20
30
40
time [Gyr] −8 −6 −4 −2 0
time [Gyr] −8 −6 −4 −2 0
Figure 3. Evolution of galaxy properties. Blue and orange lines are the results from Tide and NoTide simulations. Simulations shown in the left and right
columns adopt the cored DM density profile and the cuspy NFW profile, respectively. Upper Panels: effective radius, 𝑅e, of the stellar body as function of time.
For comparison, the black dashed horizontal line indicates the effective radius of DF2 for an assumed distance of 20 Mpc (van Dokkum et al. 2018b). The
upper and lower boundaries of the shaded region indicate the effective radius for assumed distances of 𝐷 = 22.1 Mpc (Shen et al. 2021a) and 18.9 Mpc (Cohen
et al. 2018), respectively. Lower Panels: the line-of-sight velocity dispersion of the stars within the effective radius, 𝜎star, as function of time. For comparison,
the black dashed horizontal line and the shaded region mark the observed stellar velocity dispersion of DF2 of 𝜎star = 8.5
+2.3
−3.1
km s−1
(Danieli et al. 2019).
Errorbars, which occasionally are too small to see, indicate the 15-85 percentile range obtained using 100 random orientation angles. Note how tidal stirring
causes the stellar body of the satellite to expand, and it velocity dispersion to decrease. In the absence of tides, there is no discernible evolution in either 𝑅e or
𝜎star, indicating that the satellite is dynamically stable in isolation.
Danieli et al. (2019). The satellite system starts out being completely
dominated by DM, with 𝑀DM(𝑟 < 2.7 kpc) about 13 times higher
than the stellar mass enclosed within the same radius. After each
pericentric passage, though, the DM dominance is reduced. At the
end of our simulation, after five pericentric passages, the DM mass
enclosed with 2.7kpc is only 2 times that of the enclosed stellar mass;
the satellite has become a DMDG, with properties that are similar to
what has been inferred for DF2.
3.4 Evolution of the GC population
The upper four panels of Fig. 5 are similar to Fig. 3, except that
this time they depict the evolution in the median, projected radius,
𝑅GC,med, and the line-of-sight velocity dispersion, 𝜎GC, of the GCs
rather than the stars. As with the stars, these are obtained using 100
random orientation angles per simulation output. For each projection,
only the GCs with a projected radius 𝑅 < 10 kpc are included in the
measurement; GCs that are further away from the projected centre
of the galaxy are considered stripped off3
. The physical validity of
this oversimplified ‘stripping criterion’ is discussed below.
In the case where the halo of the satellite galaxy is cored (left-hand
panels), the results are similar to what is seen for the stars: the tidal
effects cause the population of GCs to expand following each pericentric passage, while their line-of-sight velocity dispersion decreases.
After 10 Gyr the results are comparable to what is observed for DF2
3 For comparison, the GC in DF2 with the largest projected galacto-centric
radius has 𝑅 = 7.6 kpc (van Dokkum et al. 2018b).
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)
8 G. Ogiya et al.
total
star
DM
M(r
<
2.7
k
p
c) [M
⊙] 10
8
10
9
M
D
M(r
<
2.7
k
p
c)/
Mstar(r
<
2.7
k
p
c) 0
5
10
15
20
time [Gyr] −8 −6 −4 −2 0
Figure 4. Upper panel: Evolution of the enclosed mass within 2.7 kpc from
the centre of the 𝑁 -body satellite galaxy in the reference run. Blue, orange
and green lines indicate the total, stellar and DM mass, respectively. Bottom
panel: Ratio of the enclosed DM mass to the enclosed stellar mass. The
grey shaded region indicates the 95% confidence interval on corresponding
mass ratio inferred for DF2 by Danieli et al. (2019). Note how tidal stirring
transforms the satellite from a normal, DM dominated galaxy, into a DMDG
reminiscent of DF2.
(indicated by the horizontal dashed lines plus shaded regions). If
the halo is cuspy (right-hand panels), the evolution of 𝑅GC,med is
profoundly different. Rather than increasing over time, it actually
decreases in a fashion that is similar to what is seen in the NoTide
simulations (orange curves). As discussed in § 3.4.1 below, this is
due to dynamical friction.
The bottom panels of Fig. 5 show the number of GCs with 𝑅 <
10kpc in the Tide (blue lines) and NoTide (orange lines) simulations,
respectively. For comparison, the cyan and yellow lines indicate the
corresponding numbers of GCs that are gravitationally bound to the
satellite galaxy. Note that the number of GCs with 𝑅 < 10 kpc
is a reasonable ‘proxy’ for bound GCs. In the NoTide simulations
the number of GCs that remain bound and/or within a projected
separation of 10 kpc, remains constant at 10. And the same is true in
the Tide simulations with a cuspy halo. However, when the satellite
galaxy has a cored halo and tides are present, GCs occasionally are
stripped off. After 10 Gyr between 60 and 80 percent of the original
GCs remain bound and/or within a projected separation of 10 kpc.
Note, though, that stripping of the GCs does not start until after the
third pericentric passage.
Interestingly, the empirical relation between the number of GCs
and halo virial mass of Burkert & Forbes (2020) suggests that our
satellite galaxy, which has an infall mass of 𝑀200 = 6 × 1010 M,
should have 12 GCs on average. Hence, the fact that DF2 is observed
to have 10 GCs within 𝑅 = 7.6 kpc (van Dokkum et al. 2018b) is
perfectly consistent with DF2 being a tidal remnant of what used to
be a perfectly normal galaxy for a halo of that infall mass.
Since the initial position and velocity vectors of the DM particles, stars and GCs of the satellite galaxy are all drawn randomly
from their respective distributions, there is non-zero realisation-torealisation variance. This could potentially be very significant for the
GCs because of their small number. In order to test the impact of this
‘realization-variance’ we run nine additional Tide simulations with
different random realizations for the phase-space coordinates of the
𝑁-body satellite system.4 We find that the realization-to-realization
variance in the evolution of 𝑅e, 𝜎star, 𝑅GC,med, 𝜎GC and 𝑁R<10 kpc
are all very comparable to the variance arising from the random orientation angles. Hence, the errorbars in Figs. 3 and 5 roughly reflect
the uncertainties due to realization-variance. As expected, these are
significantly larger for the GCs than for the stars.
3.4.1 Mixing and Dynamical Segregation
The evolution of 𝑅GC,med and 𝜎GC reflects a competition between
processes that cause dynamical segregation of the GCs with respect
to the stars and DM particles and processes that tend to undo such
segregation.
In the absence of tides, the GCs only experience dynamical friction, which causes the GCs to undergo mass segregation with respect
to the stars. Note that in doing so, 𝜎GC decreases with time. This is
simply a consequence of the detailed potential of the satellite galaxy.
Fig. 6 shows the velocity dispersion profiles of stars in the Tide and
NoTide simulations, both initially (black) and at the present time
(i.e., after 10 Gyr of evolution). In the absence of tides, the stellar
velocity dispersion profile remains invariant, indicating that the dynamical friction experienced by the GCs does not significantly boost
the velocity dispersion of the stars. This is simply because the total
mass of the GCs is small compared to the total stellar mass of the
system. In other words, the GCs can be treated as a tracer population
in quasi-equilibrium (i.e., the dynamical friction time scale is long
compared to the dynamical time). Consequently, its velocity dispersion should resemble that of stars with a similar radial distribution.
Since 𝜎star declines towards the centre, so does the velocity dispersion among the GCs as they slowly sink towards the centre due to
dynamical friction.
In the presence of tides there are two processes that act against mass
segregation. First of all, re-virialization in response to tidal stripping
is a form of violent relaxation, which is independent of the mass of
the constituent particles (Lynden-Bell 1967). The changes in specific
energy that result from re-virialization only depend on orbital phase,
which are randomly distributed for both the stars and the GCs. Hence,
re-virialization has a tendency to mix the GCs and stars, and thus to
undo any mass segregation that might have occurred as a consequence
of dynamical friction. Secondly, the impulsive shock resulting from
the high-speed peri-centric passsage imparts the stars and GCs with
a velocity impulse that is independent of their mass, but proportional
to their satellite-centric distance squared (Spitzer 1958; Gnedin et al.
1999; Banik & van den Bosch 2021a). Hence, objects that are further
4 Studying realization variance is also useful for revealing potential numerical instabilities, as in the case of artificial disruption (e.g., van den Bosch &
Ogiya 2018).
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)
Tidal interactions and DM deficient galaxies 9
cored profile (m=1)
R
G
C,med [k
p
c] 0
1
2
3
4
5
cuspy profile (m=0)
σ
G
C [k
m
/
s] 0
10
20
30
40
50
Tide
NoTide
N
G
C
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
time [Gyr] −8 −6 −4 −2 0
time [Gyr] −8 −6 −4 −2 0
Figure 5. Evolution of the GC population. Blue and orange lines show the results from Tide and NoTide simulations, while left- and right-hand columns
show the simulation results that adopt the cored and cuspy DM halo, respectively. Top panel: median projected radius, 𝑅GC,med, of the GCs from the centre
of the satellite galaxy, indicating the spatial extent of the GC distribution. For comparison, the black dashed horizontal line indicates the corresponding radius
in DF2 assuming a distance of 20 Mpc (see van Dokkum et al. 2018b), while the upper and lower boundaries of the shaded region mark the corresponding
radii using the distance measurements of Shen et al. (2021a) and Cohen et al. (2018), respectively. Middle panel: line-of-sight velocity dispersion among the
GCs, 𝜎GC. For comparison, the black dashed horizontal line and shaded region mark the observational measurements, 𝜎GC = 7.8
+5.2
−2.2
km s−1
, for DF2 (van
Dokkum et al. 2018a). Bottom panel: number of GCs with a projected separation 𝑅 < 10 kpc. For comparison, the number of GCs that are actually bound
to the 𝑁 -body system in the Tide and NoTide simulations are shown as cyan and yellow lines, which is in good agreement with those at 𝑅 < 10 kpc. Note
that in the analyses of the top and middle panels, only GCs with 𝑅 < 10 kpc are considered. As always, errorbars indicate the 15-85 percentile range obtained
using 100 random orientation angles, while the lines show the median. Note how, in the absence of tides, the GCs sink to the centre due to dynamical friction,
resulting in a reduction of both 𝑅GC,med and 𝜎GC, as discussed in the text. In the case where the halo is cored, tidal stirring is strong enough to overcome this
mass-segregation, causing the distribution of GCs to expand following each peri-centric passages.
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)
10 G. Ogiya et al.
orange: NoTide (t=0Gyr)
blue: Tide (t=0Gyr)
black: initial (t=-9.54Gyr)
core (m=1)
cusp (m=0)
σstar [k
m
/
s] 0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
r [kpc]
0.2 0.5 1 2 5
Figure 6. Velocity dispersion profile of stars. Black lines represent the initial
configuration, while blue and orange lines are the snapshot at the present
time in the Tide and NoTide simulations, respectivey. Lines with circles
(diamonds) indicate the cases where the DM halo of the satellite galaxy has
a cored (cuspy) density profile. In the absence of tides (orange lines), the
profiles do not evolve, once again indicating that the satellite is stable in
isolation. When the satellite is subjected to tidal stripping, the stellar velocity
dispersion decreases with time, but the shape of the radial profile remains
similar to its initial shape.
from the centre of the satellite receive more kinetic energy. During
the re-virialization that ensues twice the total kinetic energy that
has been imparted to the satellite galaxy is transferred to potential
energy (Binney & Tremaine 2008). Despite a fair amount of mixing
that occurs during this re-virialization, the particles that gained more
kinetic energy will tend to move out further than their counter-parts
for whom the velocity impulse was weaker. Consequently, if the GCs
start out being distributed differently from the stars, tidal shocking
tends to enhance this difference. It causes a segregation, not by mass
but by specific binding energy. Hence, if the GCs are less centrally
concentrated than the stars prior to the tidal shock, the latter will act
in the opposite direction of mass segregation induced by dynamical
friction.
Our simulations indicate that in all cases considered dynamical
friction dominates in the sense that the GCs are always found to
undergo net mass segregation. In the absence of tidal forces this is
obvious, but even when tides are present this is the case. If the satellite
has a central cusp, 𝑅GC,med decreases while the effective radius of
the stars increases. Clearly, re-virialization and tidal shocking are
not strong enough to overcome the mass segregation induced by
dynamical friction. And even in the case where the satellite has a
central core, and dynamical friction is significantly weaker, there is
still a net mass segregation: while the effective radius of the stars
increases by a factor two (from 1.25 kpc to 2.5 kpc) over the 10 Gyr
duration of the simulation, the median radius of the GC population,
𝑅GC,med, only increases by a factor 1.5 (from 2 kpc to 3 kpc) over
the same time interval.
3.4.2 Evolution of individual GCs
Fig. 7 shows how the orbital angular momentum, 𝐿, of individual
GCs evolve in a NoTide simulation (upper panel) and the reference
NoTide
L
/
L0 0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Tide
L
/
L0 0
0.5
1
1.5
2
time [Gyr] −8 −6 −4 −2 0
Figure 7. The evolution in orbital angular momentum for the ten individual
GC particles in a NoTide simulation (upper panel) and in the reference Tide
run (lower panel). The initial conditions in both cases are identical. As a function of time, we plot the norm of the specific orbital angular momentum of the
GCs with respect to the centre of the satellite galaxy, 𝐿, scaled by the specific
orbital angular momentum of a circular orbit at 𝑟 = 𝑟GC, 𝐿0. To guide the eye,
the green and magenta curves correspond to the GCs that start out with the
largest and smallest orbital angular momentum, respectively. In the absence
of tides, 𝐿/𝐿0 steadily decreases due to dynamical friction, and except for
occasional GC-GC scattering (an example is indicated with the black solid
and dotted lines), the rank-order of 𝐿/𝐿0 is reasonably well preserved. In the
presence of tidal stirring, though, this rank-order is scrambled following each
peri-centric passage, and the variance in 𝐿/𝐿0 increases with time.
Tide run (lower panel). The initial phase-space coordinates for the
stars and GCs in both simulations are identical. Green and magenta
curves correspond to the GCs with the largest and smallest initial
angular momenta, respectively.
In the absence of tides, the angular momenta of the GCs steadily
decrease with time as a consequence of dynamical friction. Occasionally, two-body interactions (scattering) among two GCs cause a
mutual exchange of angular momentum, as in the case of the GCs indicated with the thick solid and dotted black curves, which undergo
mutual scattering around 𝑡 ∼ −5 Gyr. Occasionally, these scattering events can significantly boost the orbital angular momentum of
the GCs, thereby significantly delaying the time scale over which
they sink to the centre of the satellite galaxy (cf. Dutta Chowdhury
et al. 2019). The overall impact of GC-GC scattering is fairly limited though, such that on average the GCs maintain their angular
momentum rank-order.
This is very different in the Tide simulations, where tidal stirring
causes rapid changes in the orbital angular momenta of individual
GCs, especially shortly after the satellite galaxy has a peri-centric
passage within the host halo. Whether a GC gains or looses angular
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)
Tidal interactions and DM deficient galaxies 11
t=-9.54Gyr (initial)
t=0Gyr
μ [m
a
g
/
a
r
c
s
e
c
2] 23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
R [arcsec]
0 20 40 60 80
Figure 8. Stellar surface brightness profiles. The solid black curve indicates
the analytical 𝑛 = 1 Sérsic profile used to initialize the positions of the stellar
particles. The blue lines show the initial surface brightness profile along
10 random orientation angles, obtained by converting the projected mass
density adopting a stellar mass-to-light ratio of 𝑀/𝐿 = 2( M/ L) and
a distance of 20 Mpc. The orange lines show the stellar surface brightness
profiles (again using 10 random orientation angles) of the satellite galaxy in
our reference Tide run after 10 Gyr of evolution. Note how tidal stirring has
caused a decrease in the central surface brightness by about 2 magnitudes,
and an overall expansion, while maintaining a roughly exponential surface
brightness profile throughout.
momentum during such a peri-centric passsage depends on its orbital
phase within the satellite at that moment in time. Since these are different for each of the GCs, they all respond differently, which causes
the angular momentum rank-ordering to be scrambled following each
peri-centric passage. For instance, note how the green and magenta
lines cross, indicating that the angular momentum of the GC that
initially had the highest value of 𝐿 is (temporarily) surpassed by the
GC that started out with the lowest 𝐿. Overall, tidal stirring cause a
significant increase in the variance of the orbital angular momenta
among the GCs.
4 INTERNAL STRUCTURE OF THE SATELLITE GALAXY
Having demonstrated that tidal forces can transform a normal (average) galaxy into a DMDG with sizes and velocity dispersions that are
similar to those of DF2, we now examine how the detailed internal
structure of the satellite galaxy evolves as it is subjected to the tides.
In particular, we examine how tidal stirring impacts the radial profile
of the satellite as well as metallicity gradients. Since stirring causes
a scrambling of rank-orders, the expectation is that any pre-existing
radial gradients in metallicity, stellar age, or any other property, will
be diminished over time.
4.1 Surface brightness profile
The blue curves in Fig. 8 show the initial surface brightness profile of
our 𝑁-body satellite galaxy, with different curves corresponding to
different, random projections. For comparison, the solid black curve
shows the surface brightness profile of the 𝑛 = 1 Sérsic profile used to
initialize the particle positions as described in §2.1.1. Orange curves
Tide
NoTide
r
fi
n
al [k
p
c] 2
4
6
8
10
rinitial [kpc]
0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3
Figure 9. Distribution of stars in the 𝑟initial−𝑟final plane, where 𝑟initial and 𝑟final
are the distance from the centre of the 𝑁 -body system to each star particle
at the beginning of the simulation and at the present time, respectively. Blue
and orange lines show the results from the reference run and the NoTide
simulation of the same initial 𝑁 -body configuration. The solid line and
the lower and upper dotted lines indicate the median and the 25 and 75
percentiles of the distribution. The black line marks the line of identity, i.e.,
𝑟final = 𝑟initial, and is shown for comparison. Note how tidal stirring causes
an overall expansion, and, especially at larger radii, mixing that increases the
variance in 𝑟final for a given 𝑟initial. The small scatter and slight deviation
from identity in the NoTide case is a consequence of the fact that stars are on
non-circular orbits, as discussed in the text.
show the surface brightness profile of the 𝑁-body satellite system
at the end of the simulation. Over time, tidal stripping and shocking
have caused the stellar system to puff-up, such that the final system
is significantly more extended than initially. Note, though, that the
tidal forces have not only affected the outskirts. In fact, due to tidal
stirring the central surface brightness has decreased by a factor of
6.3, from 23 mag/arcsec2
to 25 mag/arcsec2
. Interestingly, despite
the drastic changes to the satellite’s surface brightness profile, it has
roughly remained exponential. Whether this is a mere coincidence,
or whether there is a physical reason for this shape-invariance, is a
question that we leave for future exploration.
4.2 Radial mixing
As eluded to above, tidal stirring causes a scrambling of the rank order distributions in binding energy and orbital angular momentum.
Hence, it will tend to ‘diffuse’ away any pre-existing radial gradients in for example stellar age and/or metallicity. In order to gauge
the extent of this radial mixing, Fig. 9 plots the final radii, 𝑟final,
of stellar particles versus their initial radii, 𝑟intial. Solid curves indicate the medians, while the dashed curves indicate the 25 and 75
percentiles. The solid, black curve marks the line of equality, i.e.,
𝑟final = 𝑟initial, and is shown for comparison. In the absence of tides
(orange curves), the median 𝑟final is in reasonable agreement with
the initial radius. There is some indication that particles that start out
with 𝑟initial <
∼ 2 kpc on average end up a little but further out, while
the opposite holds for particles that start out with 𝑟initial >
∼ 2 kpc.
This does not imply that there is a net evolution in the surface brightness distribution of the satellite. Rather, it merely reflects that in an
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)
12 G. Ogiya et al.
initial (t=-9.54Gyr)
accretion (t=-8.68Gyr)
Tide (t=0Gyr)
NoTide (t=0Gyr)
[Z
/
H] −0.2 −0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
r [kpc]
0.1 1 10
Figure 10. Metallicity profile. The thin line indicates the initial radial metallicity profile (equation (11) used to assign stars a metallicity based purely
on their initial radius, 𝑟initial. The thick black and orange lines shows the
metallicity profile in the NoTide simulations after ∼ 1 Gyr (when the satellite
crosses the virial radius of the host for the first time) and 10 Gyr, respectively.
The fact that stars are not on circular orbits causes a quick (< 1 Gyr ‘diffusion’ of metallicity which slightly reduces the slope d[𝑍/𝐻 ]/d log 𝑟, but
there is no subsequent, late-time evolution since the binding energies of the
star particles are conserved. In the presence of tides (blue line), though, tidal
stirring causes a strong reduction of the metallicity gradient at large radii, an
observational prediction that can be used to test whether systems like DF2
and DF4 have indeed been subjected to strong tidal stirring. At small radii,
the metallicity is slightly boosted, which is a consequence of the fact that tidal
forces preferentially strip the lower metallicity, less bound stars.
equilibrium configuration, the particles maintain their rank-order distribution in binding-energy, not in radius. Particles at a given initial
radius span a range in binding energies. At a later time, phase-mixing
assures that particles that all shared the same initial radius are now
spread out in radius, which explains the non-zero spread in 𝑟final for
a given 𝑟intial. The fact that the median deviates from the line of
equality arises from the fact that at large radii one is more likely to
find particles that are near their orbital apo-center. At later times,
on average, these particles will be at a smaller radius than initially.
Similary, at small radii, one is more likely to find particles that are
near their orbital peri-center, and those particles are more likely to
be located at a larger radii at some later point in time5
.
The blue lines in Fig. 9 show the results for our reference run with
tides. The majority of particles now have 𝑟final > 𝑟initial, which indicates once more that the stellar body of the satellite galaxy is puffing
up over time. Note that both the ratio 𝑟final/𝑟initial and the variance
in 𝑟final increase with increasing 𝑟initial. These are the hallmarks of
tidal stirring, which has a larger effect at larger radii (i.e., the velocity
impulse due to high-speed pericentric passages is ∝ 𝑟
2
), and which
scrambles the rank-ordering in binding energy and angular momentum due to the violent relaxation associated with re-virialization.
Fig. 10 illustrates how this affects a radial metallicity gradient.
Here we assign each star particle in our simulations a metallicity
based purely on its initial radius, 𝑟initial. Guided by the observed
5 Note that the typical apo-to-pericenter ratio for orbits in isotropic systems
is ∼ 4 (van den Bosch et al. 1999).
metallicity gradients in galaxies of stellar mass 𝑀∗ ∼ 2 × 108 M
(Peletier et al. 2012), we assign each star a metallicity
[𝑍/𝐻] = −0.3 log[𝑟initial/𝑅e,i
] , (11)
with 𝑅e,i = 1.25 kpc the initial effective radius of the model galaxy.
The resulting metallicity as function of radius is shown as the thin
black line in Fig. 10. The thick black line shows the median metallicity as function of radius after 1 Gyr of evolution in the NoTide
simulation. Note that the slope d[𝑍/𝐻]/d log 𝑟 has become somewhat shallower (−0.2 as compared to the initial −0.3), which is
simply a manifestation once more of the fact that, unlike binding
energy, galactocentric radius is not a conserved quantity. The orange
curve shows the results in the same NoTide simulation, but now after
10Gyr of evolution. As one can see, in the absence of tides there is no
long-term evolution in the metallicity gradient. The only evolution is
a rapid (< 1 Gyr) adjustment to account for the fact that orbits span
a range of radii.
The blue line shows the median metallicity as function of radius
after 10 Gyr of evolution in our reference Tide simulation. In the
inner region the slope is similar to that in the NoTide simulation, but
note that the median metallicity has increased. This is a consequence
of the fact that the least bound stars have the lowest metallicities and
are the stars that are most easily stripped off, or ‘dispersed’ to larger
radii as a consequence of the tidal stirring. In other words, the median
metallicity at small radii increases because the low-metallicity tail
is moved to larger radii. At larger radii (𝑟 >
∼ 5 kpc), the metallicity
gradient d[𝑍/𝐻]/d log 𝑟 becomes very shallow, which is simply a
manifestation of that fact that tidal stirring causes larger mixing at
larger radii (cf., Fig. 9). Hence, if DMDGs like DF2 have indeed
been shaped by strong tidal forces, we expect that they should have
very shallow metallicity gradients in their outskirts, something that
can in principle be tested observationally.
5 SUMMARY
The recent discovery of two DMDGs, DF2 and DF4, with abnormal
GC populations has sparked a vigorous debate as to their origin.
Although tidal dwarfs are a natural explanation for DMDGs, in the
case of DF2 and DF4 such a formation scenario does not (naturally) explain their large GC systems, nor the fact that DF2 and
DF4 seem to have metallicities that are consistent with the typical
mass-metallicity relation. An alternative explanation for their origin,
proposed by Ogiya (2018) and Nusser (2020), is that DF2 and DF4
are remnants of fairly extreme tidal mass loss. In particular, using
numerical simulations Ogiya (2018) has shown that tidal stripping
can transform a fairly normal galaxy into a DMDG with properties
reminiscent of DF2, as long as the progenitor halo had a central
density core.
An important question is whether such a stripping scenario can
explain the fact that both DF2 and DF4 have large specific frequencies
of GCs (i.e., a large number of GCs per unit stellar mass). Tidal
stripping and tidal shocking both have a tendency to preferentially
remove matter from the outskirts. Hence, if the population of GCs
is more extended than that of the stars, tidal processes will tend to
lowerthe specific frequency of GCs. However, GCs are also subject to
dynamical friction, which causes them to migrate inwards, potentially
resulting in the formation of a nuclear star cluster6
. In addition, revirialization in response to tidal stripping and shocking tends to cause
6 Unless core-stalling or GC-GC scattering prevents the GCs from reaching
the centre (see Dutta Chowdhury et al. 2019)
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)
Tidal interactions and DM deficient galaxies 13
mixing, and thus to undo any mass segregation. In this paper we used
idealized numerical simulations to study how all these processes act
together, and to see whether, starting from a normal galaxy, tidal
stripping can produce a system that is similar to DF2 and DF4 in
both the spatial distribution and kinematics of both the stars and the
GC population.
Our simulations model the tidal evolution of an 𝑁-body satellite
galaxy (i.e., the DF2 progenitor), consisting of a stellar spheroid plus
a population of GCs embedded in a DM halo, as it orbits the timeevolving analytical potential of its host galaxy (i.e., NGC 1052). The
initial satellite galaxy, prior to infall, is modeled as a ‘normal galaxy’,
having a typical stellar mass-to-halo mass ratio, a typical size for its
initial stellar mass, and a typical GC population, both in terms of the
number of GCs per unit halo mass and in terms of their spatial extent.
Its DM halo is modelled to have either a central NFW-like cusp, or
a constant density core. The analytical host halo is modelled as a
NFW halo, which slowly (adiabatically) grows its mass over time in
accordance with the average mass assembly history of halos of that
mass. In order to identify the impact of the tidal forces, we compared
the results from these Tide simulations, with NoTide simulations in
which the 𝑁-body satellite is evolved in isolation.
As the 𝑁-body satellite orbits its host halo it experiences tidal
forces that strip matter from its outskirts. Stripping is dominated
during peri-centric passage, which is also when a tidal shock injects
energy into the system. The subsequent re-virialization causes the
𝑁-body system to puff up and its velocity dispersion to decrease.
We tune the orbit such that, in the case where the initial halo of
the 𝑁-body satellite has a central core, the final stellar remnant has
an effective radius that is reminiscent of that of DF2. The resulting
orbit has a peri-centre during first infall that corresponds to the 8.3
percentile of the distribution of peri-centres for first-infall orbits of
DM substructures. After 10 Gyr of evolution, which corresponds to
5 peri-centric passages, the DM halo of the 𝑁-body satellite has lost
98.5 percent of its original mass. The stellar body, on the other hand,
only lost about 30 percent of its original mass, such that the system
has evolved from a normal DM dominated galaxy to a DMDG. In
particular, the DM mass fraction inside the central 2.7 kpc (roughly
the half-mass radius of DF2) has decreased from 13 to 2, while
the stellar velocity dispersion has decreased from ∼ 26 km s−1
to
∼ 12 km s−1
. These properties are similar to what has been observed
in DF2.
In the case where the initial halo of the 𝑁-body satellite is cuspy,
the tidal effects are significantly weaker, and after 10 Gyr the tidal
remnant is still too compact, and with a velocity dispersion that is
too high, to be considered a viable DF2 look-a-like. It may still be
possible to create a system that resembles DF2 by placing it on a more
eccentric orbit, but we suspect that this requires an extremely radial
orbit, with a peri-centre that would lie well inside the stellar body of
NGC 1052. We have not explored this option, though, and instead
mainly focus on the results obtained with the initially cored satellite.
We emphasise that the initial DM halo mass of our 𝑁-body satellite
is 6 × 1010 M, which is exactly the mass scale where stochastic
feedback from supernova is believed to be efficient in creating central
halo cores (e.g., Di Cintio et al. 2014).
If we initialise the distribution of GCs such that their effective
radius in projection is 𝑅e,GC ∼ 2 kpc, which is consistent with, but at
the low end of the observed distribution of 𝑅e,GC-values for galaxies
with a stellar mass similar to that of our initial satellite (cf. Forbes
2017), we find that the tidal effects yield a final GC distribution, after
10 Gyr of evolution that is consistent with what has been observed in
DF2. In particular, the median projected radius has increased from
2 kpc initially to ∼ 3 kpc, while the line-of-sight velocity dispersion among the GCs has decreased from ∼ 30 km s−1
initially to
∼ 10 km s−1
. Note that the increase in the median projected radius is
less pronounced than for the stellar body, which is a consequence of
dynamical friction, which causes ongoing mass segregation which is
countered by the re-virialization following each peri-centric passage.
On average, only about 20 percent of the GCs are stripped off. Hence,
given that a halo with an infall mass of 𝑀200 = 6 × 1010 M hosts
on average 12 GCs (see Burkert & Forbes 2020), the fact that the
observed number of GCs around DF2 is 10, is in excellent agreement
with our tidal formation scenario. We emphasise, though, that this is
fairly sensitive to the initial 𝑅e,GC adopted; if we set 𝑅e,GC = 3 kpc,
rather than 2 kpc, the average fraction of GCs that is stripped off
increases to ∼ 80 percent (Appendix B).
We conclude that the tidal formation scenario for DMDGs like
DF2 and DF4 is viable in that it can successfully explain the DM
deficiency, the low central surface brightness, the low stellar velocity dispersion, as well as the phase-space properties of the GC
population, without having to resort to an extreme orbit or extreme
properties of the pre-infall progenitor galaxy. The only requirements
are that the progenitor has a cored DM halo, which, as discussed
above, is perfectly plausible, and that the initial distribution of GCs
is relatively concentrated. A testable prediction of this tidal formation scenario is that, due to the tidal stirring-induced mixing, the
outskirts of the tidal remnants should have very shallow metallicity
gradients. The only puzzling observation of DF2 and DF4 that remains without proper explanation in this scenario is the abnormal
luminosity functions of their GCs. Whereas it is to be expected that
the tides preferentially strip the less massive GCs (the more massive
ones experience stronger dynamical friction, causing them to sink
towards the centre where they are better shielded from tidal stripping), which goes in the right direction to explain the overabundance
of luminous GCs observed in DF2, this fails to explain why DF2 has
multiple GCs that appear similar to 𝜔-Cen, the most luminous GC
of the Milky Way. It remains to be seen whether a viable solution
for this abnormality can be found within the tidal formation scenario
proposed here.
APPENDIX A: ORBITAL PARAMETERS
The simulations presented in the main body of this paper adopt
orbital parameters (𝑥c = 1.0 and 𝜂 = 0.3) that were tuned such that
the stellar body, at the end of the simulation (after 10 Gyr), has an
effective radius and line-of-sight velocity dispersion that are roughly
in agreement with the measurements of DF2. We emphasise, though,
that this choice of orbital parameters is not necessarily unique, and
that there may well be other combinations of 𝑥c and 𝜂 that yield
similar outcomes. Since the main point of this paper is to investigate
whether tides can transform a normal galaxy into a DMDG that is
somewhat similar to DF2, this potential degeneracy is of no concern.
In this appendix we briefly highlight how the results depend on the
orbital circularity 𝜂, while keeping 𝑥c, which controls the orbital energy, fixed at unity. Here we use the satellite for which the initial DM
halo is cored (𝑚 = 1), and we adopt the fiducial spatial distribution
of GCs with 𝑟gc = 2.5 kpc.
Fig. A1 shows that when the satellite galaxy is on a more radial
orbit, characterised by a smaller 𝜂, it experiences more significant
tidal mass loss. This is simply a consequence of the fact that a smaller
𝜂 implies a smaller peri-centric distance, and thus stronger tides.
Consequently, the satellite experiences more tidal stirring, causing
it to ‘puff-up’ more. The middle panel shows that in the case of
𝜂 = 0.2, the effective radius at the end of the simulation is almost
twice as large as in our reference case (𝜂 = 0.3). In fact, as evident
from the evolution of the bound mass (top panel) and the stellar
velocity dispersion (bottom panel), the system is close to break-up.
Using a more circular orbit, with 𝜂 = 0.5, yields significantly less
mass loss, a reduced increase in 𝑅e, and a reduced decrease in 𝜎star.
Consequently, at the end of the simulation it is still too compact and
dynamically too hot to resemble DF2.
The results for the GC population (not shown) are similar to what
is seen for the stars. In the simulation with 𝜂 = 0.2, the GC orbits
expand too much, and all GC end up being stripped from the satellite
by the present time (i.e., after 10 Gyr of evolution). In the simulation
with 𝜂 = 0.5, tidal stirring is insufficient to produce a GC population
with phase-space parameters that are consistent with DF2.
These results motivate the choice for 𝜂 = 0.3 adopted as the
fiducial value throughout this paper.
η=0.3 (ref. run)
η=0.2
η=0.5
M
b [M
⊙] 10
8
10
9
10
10
10
11
Re [k
p
c] 0
1
2
3
4
5
σstar [k
m
/
s] 0
10
20
30
40
time [Gyr] −8 −6 −4 −2 0
Figure A1. Dynamical evolution of the 𝑁 -body satellite galaxy with a cored
DM halo in Tide simulations for different values of the orbital circularity, 𝜂,
as indicated. All orbits have 𝑥c = 1.0. Top panel: evolution of the total bound
mass (stars, DM and GCs) as a function of time. Middle panel: effective
radius of the stellar body in projection, 𝑅e, as a function of time. Bottom
panel: line-of-sight velocity dispersion of stars, 𝜎star, as function of time.
Horizontal dashed lines and shaded regions indicate the observed values for
DF2 (see caption of Fig. 3 for details), and are shown for comparison. Note
how more radial orbits (smaller 𝜂) leads to more mass loss and stronger tidal
stirring (causing an increase in 𝑅e and a decrease in 𝜎star.
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)
16 G. Ogiya et al.
APPENDIX B: INITIAL EXTENT OF THE POPULATION
OF GLOBULAR CLUSTERS
In this Appendix we briefly examine how the tidal evolution of the
GC population depends on its initial, spatial extent. As discussed in
§ 2.1.3, we initialise the GCs at a fixed radius, 𝑟GC, from the centre
of the satellite system, after which they quickly ‘disperse’ into a
spatial distribution that is well characterised by a Sérsic profile with
𝑛 = 0.5 and an effective radius, 𝑅e,GC, that is comparable to 𝑟GC.
Throughout the paper we adopt 𝑟GC = 2.5 kpc as our fiducial value,
which yields an initial 𝑅e,GC = 2.0 kpc. This is consistent with, but
at the low end of the distribution of 𝑅e,GC values for our (initial)
satellite galaxy. The average value of 𝑅e,GC is somewhat larger (e.g.,
Forbes et al. 2017; Hudson & Robison 2018). In particular, Forbes
et al. (2017) suggests that the average 𝑅e,GC for a system with a halo
mass of 6 × 1010 M is 3.1 kpc. Through trial and error we find that
if we initialise our GCs with 𝑟GC = 4.0 kpc, they quickly disperse to
a 𝑛 = 0.5 Sérsic profile with 𝑅e,GC ' 3.1 kpc.
Fig. B1 compares the evolution of the GC population in two simulations that only differ in their value of 𝑟GC. All other parameters
are kept fixed to those of our reference run (i.e., 𝑥c = 1.0, 𝜂 = 0.3,
and the initial DM halo is cored). Blue and orange lines show the
results for 𝑟GC = 2.5 kpc (our fiducial value) and 𝑟GC = 4.0 kpc,
respectively. Whereas the evolution in 𝜎𝐺𝐶 is similar in both cases
(middle panel), the fraction of GCs that remain bound to the satellite (bottom panel) in the case with 𝑟GC = 4.0 kpc is significantly
reduced with respect to our reference run. In particular, on average
only about 20 percent of the initial GCs remain bound (or, using our
proxy for boundness, have 𝑅 < 10 kpc). Consequently, the initial
satellite would have had to start out with ∼ 50 GCs at infall in order
to end up with 10 GCs (as in DF2) at the present time. Such a large
number of GCs is unrealistic for a halo of 6 × 1010 M (Burkert
& Forbes 2020). Hence, in order to end up with a GC population
similar to what is observed in DF2, the progenitor galaxy at infall
needs to have a distribution of GCs that is fairly compact, but not
unrealistically so.
Finally, we emphasise that the evolution of the effective radius
and line-of-sight velocity dispersion of the stars is not significantly
effected by a change in 𝑟GC, indicating that the dynamical friction
experienced by the GCs does not significantly heat the stellar component (i.e., the total stellar mass of the GCs is too small to impact
the stellar body).
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by the author.
rGC=2.5kpc (ref. run)
rGC=4.0kpc
R
G
C,med [k
p
c] 0
1
2
3
4
5
σ
G
C [k
m
/
s] 0
10
20
30
40
50
N
R
<10k
pc 0
2
4
6
8
10
12
time [Gyr] −8 −6 −4 −2 0
Figure B1. Evolution of the GC population in Tide simulations for different
values of the initial radius of the GCs with respect to the centre of the
satellite, 𝑟GC, as indicated. All other parameters are kept fixed to those of
our reference run. Top panel: the median, projected radius, 𝑅GC,med of the
GCs with 𝑅 < 10 kpc (a reasonable proxy for bound GCs). Middle panel: the
line-of-sight velocity dispersion of the GCs with 𝑅 < 10 kpc. Bottom panel:
the number of GCs with 𝑅 < 10 kpc. Errorbars indicate the 15-85 percentile
range of values obtained using 100 random orientation angles. Horizontal
dashed lines and shaded regions indicate the observed values for DF2 (see
caption of Fig. 5 for details), and are shown for comparison. Note how the
number of GCs that is stripped off from the satellite depends sensitively on
the assumed value for 𝑟GC.
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2021)i
