Hybrid mapping of the Einstein ring in M87
ABSTRACT
We present a reanalysis of the EHT 228 GHz observations of M87. We apply traditional hybrid
mapping techniques to the publicly available ‘network-calibrated’ data. We explore the impact on the
final image of different starting models, including: a point source, a disk, an annulus, a Gaussian, and
an asymmetric double Gaussian. The images converge to an extended source with a size ∼ 44 µas.
Starting with the annulus and disk models leads to images with the lowest noise, smallest off-source
artifacts, and better closure residuals. The source appears as a ring, or edge-brightened disk, with
higher surface brightness in the southern half, consistent with previous results. Starting with the other
models leads to a surface brightness distribution with a similar size, and an internal depression, but
not as clearly ring-like. A consideration of visibility amplitudes vs. UV-distance argues for a roughly
circularly symmetric structure of ∼ 50 µas scale, with a sharp-edge, based on a prominent minimum
in the UV-distribution, and the amplitude of the secondary peak in the UV-plot is more consistent
with an annular model than a flat disk model. With further processing, we find a possible modest
extension from the ring toward the southwest, in a direction consistent with the southern limb of the
jet seen on 3mm VLBI images on a factor of few larger scales. However, this extension appears along
the direction of one of the principle sidelobes of the synthesized beam, and hence requires testing with
better UV-coverage.
Keywords: black hole physics — galaxies: individual (M87) — galaxies: jets — gravitational lensing: strong — techniques: image processing — techniques: interferometric — quasars:
supermassive black holes
1. INTRODUCTION
The Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) collaboration has
recently presented the highest resolution image of the active nucleus in the nearby radio galaxy (distance of 16.8
Mpc), M87 (Virgo A), with a resolution of ∼ 20µas at
1.3 mm observing wavelength. This image reveals a ringlike morphology, likely representing the General Relativistic ‘shadow’ of the supermassive black hole, showing
the strongly lensed (almost closed) photon orbits with
a ring radius of 21µas, corresponding to ' 5.5 gravitational radii for a black hole of mass 6.5×109 M (Event
Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al. 2019a,b). Their
image processing followed multiple techniques, with consistent results, namely, a ring, from all methods exCorresponding author: Christopher L. Carilli
ccarilli@nrao.edu
Nithyanandan.Thyagarajan@csiro.au
plored. They also perform tests using model data sets of
different morphologies, to verify the consistency of their
image processing. Most recently, they have delineated
the polarization structure of the ring emission (Event
Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al. 2021a).
The EHT collaboration has gracefully made the network calibrated data available for investigation by the
community1
. We have been reanalyzing the EHT M87
data in the context of an image-plane visualization of
closure phase, and Shape-Orientation-Size conservation
in interferometry (Thyagarajan & Carilli 2020).
In this paper, we expand upon the EHT imaging and
self-calibration process, by exploring the limits of standard hybrid mapping techniques long employed in Very
Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) (Walker (1999);
Pearson & Readhead (1984); Readhead & Wilkinson
(1978); Cornwell & Wilkinson (1981); see proceedings
1 https://eventhorizontelescope.org/for-astronomers/data
arXiv:2111.11626v2 [astro-ph.CO] 24 Nov 2021
2 Carilli & Thyagarajan
of Zensus et al. (1995)). While it is now impossible to
avoid any knowledge of possible source structure, given
the already published results, we follow uniform hybrid
mapping processes, guided by the data. Within the chosen processes, and keeping in mind the possibility of
confirmation bias, we explore a simple question: how do
changes to the starting model in the self-calibration process affect the final image? We adopt a series of generic
starting models, and employ a consistent set of imaging
and self-calibration steps for each model. Hence, any
implicit confirmation bias will at least be common to
the results from each starting model, so differences in
the results between models remain relevant.
2. HYBRID IMAGING AND SELF-CALIBRATION
2.1. EHT Data and Processing
The EHT data are described in detail in Event Horizon
Telescope Collaboration et al. (2019c). In brief, observations were made of the nuclear regions of the nearby radio galaxy, M87 (Virgo A), with the goal of imaging the
event horizon of the hypothesized supermassive black
hole. Observations were made on four days in April (5th
to 11th), 2017, at 227.1 GHz and 229.1 GHz, each with
a total bandwidth of 1.875 GHz, using an array comprised of seven telescopes spanning the globe, including
Europe, South America, continental USA, and Hawaii.
The observations each day spanned about 6 hours, in a
series of ∼ 7 min scans, interspersed with observations
of other sources.
The EHT collaboration provides public data that have
had a priori gain (visibility flux density) calibration applied based on the measured system parameters at each
telescope, as well as delay calibration via visibility fringe
fitting (Cotton 1995; Walker 1999), plus further adjustments based on a few redundant baselines in the array
(Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al. 2019c).
The gain calibration provides reasonable visibility amplitudes (to within ∼ 10%). The initial calibration provides enough phase stability to average the data in time
to 10 s records, and in frequency to a single 1.875 GHz
channel. The EHT collaboration designates these data
as the ‘network-calibrated data’, and we follow this designation below.
However, the EHT collaboration emphasize that the
initial calibration alone does not allow for phase coherent imaging (Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration
et al. 2019a), due to residual phase errors arising from
e.g. errors in station clocks, the tropospheric model, or
polarization leakage. Subsequent element-based phase
self-calibration is required to produce a phase coherent astronomical image. They state: ‘Lack of absolute
phase information and a priori calibration uncertainties
in EHT measurements require multiple consecutive iterations of CLEAN followed by self-calibration, a routine
that solves for station gains to maximize consistency
with visibilities of a specified trial image (Pearson &
Readhead 1984)’.
Starting with the network-calibrated data, the EHT
collaboration explored three separate imaging and selfcalibration processes, including inverse-modeling and
forward-modeling approaches. The forward-modeling
approach searches through image-plane parameter space
for sky surface brightness models which best match the
visibility measurements (based on some goodness-of-fit
criterion). The model-to-data comparison is made between the visibility amplitudes and closure phases on
closed triads of array stations. The antenna complex
gains are adjusted to optimize the fit. Closure phases
are used because they are insensitive to antenna-based
phase errors (Jennison 1958; Readhead & Wilkinson
1978; Schwab 1980; Wilkinson 1989; Cornwell & Fomalont 1999; Thompson et al. 2017), although closure
phases do not constrain arbitrary sky-plane translations
of images made from independent closed triads (Readhead & Wilkinson 1978; Thyagarajan & Carilli 2020),
thereby requiring some initial alignment procedure using a prior sky-model.
The inverse-modeling approach employed by the EHT
team corresponded to a standard hybrid mapping (selfcalibration and imaging) approach using DIFMAP2
(Shepherd 1997). Hybrid imaging uses a simple starting
model for initial phase self-calibration of the data. Selfcalibration entails making adjustments to antenna-based
complex gains (phase, or phase and amplitude), to obtain enough coherence to synthesize initial images of
source structure3
.
The station-based gain adjustments are derived by
minimizing χ
2 of the differences between the visibility
data and visibilities derived from the Fourier transform
of the sky brightness model (or another goodness-of-fit
criterion). Subsequent iterations of calibration then use
source models derived from the data itself, to derive further corrections of station-based phases and amplitude.
The typical process employs the CLEAN imaging and
deconvolution algorithm, which effectively breaks down
the source structure into point sources, with the selfcalibration model then corresponding to the point source
CLEAN components (Perley 1999; Walker 1999).
A starting model is required for self-calibration to
obtain enough coherence to produce a rough image of
the source, and launch the hybrid mapping process.
As a starting model in the DIFMAP inverse-modeling
approach, the EHT collaboration employed the simplest of possible starting models, namely, a point source
(Gomez priv. comm.). They also restrict the subsequent CLEAN models to disk-shaped regions in the
2 https://github.com/eventhorizontelescope/2019-D01-02/tree/
master/difmap
3 Note that by restricting corrections to antenna-based calibration
terms only, these corrections necessarily conserve closure phase
measurements on closed triads of antennas (Thompson et al.
2017; Wilkinson 1989; Readhead & Wilkinson 1978; Thyagarajan
& Carilli 2020).
Hybrid mapping of the ring in M87 3
image plane, for further self-calibration. They state
(Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al. 2019a):
‘A disk-shaped set of CLEAN windows, or imaging
mask, aligned with the previously found geometrical
center of the underlying emission structure (e.g.the ring
in M87), and with a specified diameter is then supplied;
these windows define the area on the image where the
CLEAN algorithm searches for point sources. We limited the cleaning windows to image only the compact
structure (100 µas) in order to prevent CLEAN from
adding larger-scale emission features that are poorly
constrained by the lack of short EHT baselines.’ For
the forward-modeling approach starting model, the EHT
collaboration denote a Gaussian image as the prior
(Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al. 2019a):
‘Similar to the EHT-imaging and DIFMAP scripts, the
SMILI imaging procedure is iterative, with four stages
of imaging and self-calibration. Reconstructions at each
stage begin with a circular Gaussian with a FWHM of 20
µas as the initial image. After the first imaging attempt
in each stage, subsequent initializations use the previously obtained image convolved with the initial Gaussian.’
The EHT collaboration explored the robustness of
their imaging and self-calibration process by generating source models of very different types (double Gaussian sources, disk, annulus, etc.), adding realistic thermal noise and station-based complex gain errors, and
then reconstructing the images via their imaging and
self-calibration processes (Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al. 2019a). This analysis resulted in choosing imaging and self-calibration procedures that were
robust to different morphological features. These procedures were then applied in the imaging of the M87 data,
using the simple starting models, as described above.
Here, we present a representative exploration of how
changes to the starting models in the self-calibration
process itself, can affect the final outcome of the Hybrid
imaging process for the EHT observations of the ring
in M87 itself. The starting model is an issue because,
for relatively sparse VLBI arrays, such as the EHT,
and extended source morphologies, it is well known
that, depending on the complexity of the source and
the density of UV-coverage, it is possible that the iterative self-calibration process can ‘turn the data into
the model’ (Perley 1999; Readhead & Wilkinson 1978;
Walker 1999), meaning, the optimization problem may
be under-, or marginally, constrained. This issue is particularly true for the EHT data, in which the ALMA
array, acting as a single element in the array, is close to
two orders of magnitude more sensitive than any other
element in the array. We return to this issue below.
2.2. Hybrid Mapping in AIPS
Figure 1 shows the network-calibrated (ie. a priori flux
density calibrated), visibility data from the EHT observations of M87 (Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration
et al. 2019c). Plotted in the figure are the visibility amplitudes vs. UV-distance. The EHT collaboration estimate errors on the flux density scale for the visibilities
of typically around 10% to 20%, and this error range is
supported by subsequent amplitude calibration corrections in the self-calibration process (see Figure 3). Also
shown are visibility phases vs. UV-distance, after selfcalibration. We discuss this latter plot in Section 3.3.
This uv-plot already tells us much about the source.
First, the source is clearly well resolved, with rapidly
decreasing flux density versus baseline length. Second,
the ‘depression’, or possible null, in the uv-plot suggests something non-Gaussian, with a fairly circularly
symmetric surface brightness distribution and a hardedge, since, for instance, a Gaussian source does not
produce any nulls, while a double Gaussian or double
point source distribution would have a series of nulls that
depend on the position angles of the visibility fringes relative to the source separation. More complex assemblies
of point sources will generally have UV-distributions
that are broad in amplitude across UV-distance (see
Pearson (1999) and Purcell & Wilkinson (2019)
4
). The
UV distribution has the characteristics of a J1 Bessel
function, corresponding to the Fourier transform of a
disk or annulus (an annulus corresponds to the difference of two J1 Bessel functions of different diameters).
The position of the depression at about 4 × 109 wavelengths implies a characteristic size scale ∼ 50 µas. We
will use this information to guide our starting models,
as was also true for the processing employed by EHT
team.
We performed our hybrid mapping process using the
Astronomical Image Processing System (AIPS; Greisen
2003). Again, hybrid mapping is a standard ‘inverse
modeling’ method to derive element based gains, and the
sky brightness, via iterative image generation and selfcalibration using the resulting images themselves in each
iteration (Pearson & Readhead 1984; Purcell & Wilkinson 2019).
There are a number of challenges with the EHT data.
First, the coverage of the Fourier plane (uv-coverage) is
relatively sparse (see Fig. 12 in Event Horizon Telescope
Collaboration et al. 2019c), and the source has significant structure. Second, the initial sky surface brightness
model derived from a Fourier transform of the networkcalibrated data shows no coherent structure, and hence
does not provide a useful starting model.
And third, the ALMA array, as one element in the
VLBI array, has roughly 60 times the sensitivity of any
other element (Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration
et al. 2019c). Hence, if the weights in the visibility data
are used in the self-calibration process, ALMA acts as an
unmovable anchor, around which the other station gains
4 http://www.jb.man.ac.uk/ira4/IRA4%20SuppMat Chapter9.
htm
4 Carilli & Thyagarajan
Figure 1. A plot of the visibility amplitudes and phases vs. baseline length (in wavelengths, for a wavelength of 1.31 mm). The
amplitudes have only the network-calibration applied (a priori flux density calibrated). The phase data have been necessarily
self-calibrated, as per Section 2.2. The red line is a disk model, and the cyan line is an annular model, both normalized as
described in Section 3.2. Note the cyan line phases have been offset by 1◦
in order to show both cyan and red curves in regions
of overlap.
are adjusted, hence leading to a situation where supposed antenna-based gain corrections approach baselinebased gain corrections. The latter leads to the clear danger of ‘turning the data into the model’ (Perley 1999).
Moreover, when required gain corrections are dominated
by systematic errors, and not by thermal noise, then
weighting by the thermal sensitivity of a given station
may not be optimal (Carilli et al. 1991).5
We address these difficulties as follows. First, we reweight the visibility data, to lower the dominance of
ALMA on the calibration process, as was also done by
the EHT collaboration (Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al. 2019a), by taking the square root of the
data weights for all baselines6
. We have flagged the very
short baselines (ALMA to APEX and JCMT to SMA)
as was done in Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration
et al. (2019c) before any processing.
Second, we adopt a series of simple starting models
for a first iteration of phase self-calibration. Again, a
starting sky model is required to provide some coherence for further self-calibration using sky models derived from the data. Adopting simple starting models,
such as point sources, or Gaussians, is a standard tech5 Further, while the signal-to-noise of baselines that contain ALMA
are much higher than for non-ALMA baselines, in procedures
that employ model fitting to closure phases, every closure triad
that includes ALMA must also include one baseline that does
not involve ALMA. Hence, in terms of the closure phase, triads
that include ALMA are at most root(3) lower noise than those
without ALMA.
6 We explored other weighting schemes, such as uniform weights
across the EHT array, but found a square root filter provided the
best results.
nique in hybrid mapping procedures (Pearson & Readhead 1984; Walker 1999), and again, starting models
were employed by the EHT collaboration themselves
(Section 2.1). While the a priori flux density calibrated
visibility plot (Figure 1), argues against a point source,
to maintain generality, we employ a number of starting
models, including:
• a point source,
• a Gaussian of FWHM = 40 µas,
• a disk of diameter 55 µas,
• an annulus of maximum diameter of 55 µas and
inner diameter of 25 µas
• an asymmetric double, both Gaussians of FWHM
= 20 µas, separated by 40 µas, with a flux density
ratio of 2:1.
The size scale for the starting models was guided by the
uv-plot shown in Figure 1.
The first iteration of self-calibration employs the
model image, and phase-only self-calibration. In every
self-calibration iteration, we derive scan-averaged solutions, impose a minimum number of array stations of
four, and set a signal-to-noise threshold of 2.5 σ for acceptable station gain solutions. We use a linear (L1)
minimization criterion, and not χ
2
, to reduce the impact of outlier measurements7
. After the first modelbased self-calibration, we then derive source models from
7 L1 minimization implies a weighted sum of the moduli of the
residuals is minimized (Schwab 1981)
Hybrid mapping of the ring in M87 5
the data using the CLEAN imaging algorithm. For
the imaging, we employed IMAGR in AIPS, with robust
weighting (R = 0), a cell size of 2 µas, and a loop gain
of 0.03. The resulting CLEAN Gaussian restoring beam
has a FWHM of about 22 µas×16 µas, major axis position angle of 25◦
, in all cases, and we restore the final
CLEAN images with this beam.
We perform one iteration of phase self-calibration using the a priori model, and then proceed through a second iteration of phase self-calibration using the CLEAN
component sky model derived from these data. We
then employ two iterations of amplitude and phase selfcalibration, with the improving CLEAN models. There
is an inevitable subjectivity in the processing due to the
fact that the EHT collaboration have already presented
robust images of the ring in M87. However, it remains
true that the characteristic angular scale of the source
is already fairly well determined by Figure 1, as was
also employed as a guide in the EHT imaging paper. To
systemitize the model generation process, in each iteration of CLEAN we set CLEAN boxes to cover regions
with ≥ 5σ surface brightness, and we stop the CLEAN
process at 1 mJy component flux density.
A total of four iterations of self-calibration was adequate to achieve convergence (two phase, two amplitude and phase), where convergence was measured by a
change of less than 10% in the rms and peak negative
sidelobe, in the final image.
3. RESULTS
3.1. Data
We begin by showing two examples of the calibration
solutions that are derived at key steps in the hybrid mapping process. We look at the solutions for two different
models: the annulus and the point source. Comparative
results for the other models are similar.
Figure 2 shows the phase solutions after the first phase
self-calibration using the a priori sky model, for baselines
involving ALMA. There is clear coherence in time for the
phase solutions: smooth phase gradients over time are
seen, and the gradients from the point source and the
annulus models parallel each other with time. There
are also clear phase offsets between the point source
and the annular models. These systematic offsets between models demonstrate that self-calibration does not
preserve absolute astrometry. In particular, phase calibration with a point source model at the phase center
will tend to shift the brightest feature in the sky brightness to the phase center. We shall see that trend in the
final images below.
Figure 3 shows the amplitude solutions after the
first iteration of phase and amplitude self-calibration.
The amplitude corrections are generally ±10% to 20%,
with the LMT showing the largest corrections, as was
also found in the EHT collaboration processing (Event
Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al. 2019a). Again,
the amplitude corrections for the point-source starting
model and the annular starting model, track each other
reasonably. More uv-data are flagged due to the signalto-noise criteria for solutions with the point source starting model, but only at the start of the observation on
some baselines to the Pico Veleta antenna.
3.2. Images
Figure 4 shows the final images at 229.1 GHz for the
different starting models, as well as for the networkcalibrated data. The network-calibrated data clearly
shows little/no coherence, as expected. We re-emphasize
that, in all cases, the hybrid mapping process followed
a uniform sequence of (i) setting CLEAN boxes to cover
regions with ≥ 5σ surface brightness, (ii) cleaning to
a uniform residual level, (iii) stopping after 4 iterations (two phase only, two amplitude and phase selfcalibration).
The self-calibrated images all show an extended source
with a scale ∼ 40 µas, consistent with the UV plot shown
in Figure 1. Table 1 shows the results for the maximum
surface brightness, rms noise, maximum negative artifact, and total flux density in the final images.
The hybrid mapping processes starting with the annulus and disk models converge on a ring-like structure,
with a clear central depression. These two images have
the best image-quality metrics, meaning off-source noise
and artifacts.
In the images starting with a point source, Gaussian,
and an asymmetric double source, the source does appear extended on a similar scale of ∼ 50µas. However, the images themselves are substantially noisier, by
30% to 60% (see Table 1), and with larger peak residuals by similar factors. The asymmetric double starting model produces the poorest of the final images, in
terms of noise and artifacts. In these cases, the selfcalibration process shifts the peak of the final image to
the position of the peak on the input model, since phase
self-calibration does not preserve absolute astrometry
(Readhead & Wilkinson 1978). And while depressions
do exist within the source perimeter, any possible ring
is not as clearly defined in the final images.
Figure 5 shows the closure phases on six representative triads for one day of data, compared to the model
derived from the CLEAN components in the final imaging stage. In all cases, we CLEAN to the same number of iterations. The five different starting models in
the self-calibration process are shown in different colors.
Column 6 in Table 1 lists the rms deviation (represented
by square-root of the normalized χ
2
) of closure phases
between the final CLEAN models and the data for all
days, and all triads in which the time on-source was
more than 50 min, and the rms deviations of the data
itself were < 50◦
. The rms deviations between data and
model are normalized for each triad by the rms of the
data on each triad, and then summed to give a global,
normalized rms value for all the data.
6 Carilli & Thyagarajan
Figure 2. Phase self-calibration solutions from the first iteration of phase self-calibration using an a priori model. The annulus
model is magenta and the point source model is blue. The array element is noted in each frame Event Horizon Telescope
Collaboration et al. (2019c). ALMA is not shown, since it was used as the phase reference antenna (phase ≡ 0).
Figure 3. Amplitude self-calibration solutions from the first iteration of amplitude self-calibration. Again, the data starting
from an annulus model is shown in magenta, and a point source starting model in blue. The array element is noted in each
frame Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al. (2019c).
Hybrid mapping of the ring in M87 7
0 20 40
MicroArc seconds
MicroArc seconds
80 60 40 20 0 -20 -40 -60 -80
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
0 20 40
MicroArc seconds
MicroArc seconds 80 60 40 20 0 -20 -40 -60 -80
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
0 20 40
MicroArc seconds
MicroArc seconds 80 60 40 20 0 -20 -40 -60 -80
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
0 20 40
MicroArc seconds
MicroArc seconds
80 60 40 20 0 -20 -40 -60 -80
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
0 20 40
MicroArc seconds
MicroArc seconds 80 60 40 20 0 -20 -40 -60 -80
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
Annulus
Point
Double
-20 -10 0 10 20
MicroArc seconds
MicroArc seconds
80 60 40 20 0 -20 -40 -60 -80
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
Network
Disk
Gaussian
Figure 4. Six images of M87 at 229.1 GHz made starting from the EHT network-calibrated data (Event Horizon Telescope
Collaboration et al. 2019c). Contours are geometric progression in square root two, starting at 2 mJy beam−1
in all cases.
Negative surface brightnesses are dashed. The greyscale is from −20 mJy beam−1
to 20 mJy beam−1
for network-calibrated
data, and from −1 mJy beam−1
to 55 mJy beam−1
in the rest. The frames are labeled according to the starting model in the
hybrid mapping sequence. The restoring beam is a Gaussian of FWHM = 22 µas × 16 µas, with a major axis position angle of
25◦
.
8 Carilli & Thyagarajan
Figure 5. Closure phase for the data and the final CLEAN component models for six representative triads for the EHT,
for one day, and five different starting models for self-calibration: annulus (black), disk (blue), Gaussian (green), point (cyan),
asymmetric double (red).
Table 1. Imaging results at 229.1 GHz
Starting Max Min RMS Total Closure
model Phase hχ
2
i
1
2
(
mJy
beam ) ( mJy
beam ) ( mJy
beam ) (mJy) (normalized)
Annulus 55.4 −3.4 0.66 262 0.98
Point 73.3 −3.4 0.89 266 1.25
Disk 59.0 −3.4 0.66 245 0.99
Gaussian 76.0 −3.2 0.83 241 0.97
Asym. Double 83.1 −4.2 1.1 277 1.42
The normalized rms closure phase deviations between
model and data are very similar for the annulus, disk,
and Gaussian starting models, while higher for the point
source starting model, and highest for the asymmetric
double model, although only by about 50%. Closure
phase is a useful diagnostic in that the values are robust
of antenna-based calibration terms. However, the images themselves contain added information from the visibility amplitudes, and hence provide potentially deeper
insight into the quality of the final product from the
self-calibration process.
3.3. Disk or Ring?
Overall, hybrid imaging of EHT interferometric visibility data, following a uniform set of steps in the process, leads to an extended source on a scale of ∼ 40 µas.
Starting the hybrid mapping process with a disk or annulus model converges to the best images, in terms of
image noise and artifacts, and closure phase residuals.
These images show well defined rings. Starting with
point, Gaussian, and asymmetric double models show
sources with internal depressions, but any ring itself is
less clearly defined.
We emphasize that in no case does the deepest depression within the source go to zero surface brightness. The
deepest depression still has a surface brightness greater
than 10σ, and only a factor 2.5 below the minimum surface brightness along the ring itself in e.g. the annulus
starting model image. Indeed, whether there is a true
annulus, with zero intensity in the center, as opposed to,
e.g. an edge-brightened disk, is impossible to tell from
these data for two reasons. First is that the FWHM of
the synthesized beam is only a factor two smaller than
the ring diameter. And second is, again, the sparse UVcoverage.
Readhead & Wilkinson (1978) showed early in the
history of VLBI that imaging an edge-brightened, and
disk-like (their figure 8), sources with internal structure using a sparse array is challenging: simply going
from a four to five element array makes substantial improvements in recovered structure. The EHT has 7 elements, although the mutual visibilities are not continuous, meaning the UV-coverage changes substantially
over the course of the observation. Sometimes only four
Hybrid mapping of the ring in M87 9
antennas are on source, in particular at the start of
the observation. Moreover, the Readhead & Wilkinson (1978) study employed large antennas and bright
sources at low frequency, and hence were of uniformly
high signal-to-noise, as shown in Wilkinson et al. (1979).
The EHT has large differences in signal-to-noise for different baselines, and many low signal-to-noise baselines
that do not include ALMA. Hence, the challenges cited
by Readhead & Wilkinson (1978) may be even greater
for the EHT, and it is not surprising that the EHT hybrid imaging results, while suggestive, are not conclusive
as to the ring structure in M87.
One simple argument for a ring or disk remains the
UV-plot shown in Figure 1. For the visibility amplitudes vs. UV-distance, we plot the amplitudes with only
network-calibration (a priori gains) applied, i.e., before
any self-calibration. Again, the depression, or possible
null, in the amplitude vs. distance distribution, argues
for an annular or disk model (meaning, a UV-distance
vs. amplitude plot more like a J1 Bessel function), as
opposed to e.g. a double source, which will have nulls
that vary with the relative projection of the fringe spacing along the double source position angle. Generally,
on a UV-plot involving multiple antennas and just the
UV-distance (i.e. projected length of baseline, but no
position angle information), such as Figure 1, collections
of point sources will typically not show a distinct null
(Pearson 1999).
In Figure 1 we show two model visibility distributions.
The models are for a disk and an annulus. The sizes for
the models were guided by the results from the hybrid
mapping process, such that the position of the null corresponds roughly to the lowest visibility amplitudes (see
Section 3.4. The model amplitudes were then adjusted
to best fit the visibilities (lowest unnormalized χ
2
). The
data are noisy, and the position of the null is gross, but
the models do show one significant difference: the second peak of the disk model is distinctly lower than that
for the annular model (Pearson 1999; Purcell & Wilkinson 2019). Specifically, the flat disk model falls well
below the data itself. This difference in the visibility
amplitude vs. UV-distance for a disk vs. annulus vs.
Gaussian was also noted in Figure 1 in Event Horizon
Telescope Collaboration et al. (2019b).
For the phases, the lack of phase coherence in the
network-calibrated data necessitates the use of the selfcalibrated data. The visibility phase vs. UV-distance
plot for the models shows either zero, or ±180o phases,
since the models are circularly symmetric, and centered
on the phase center. The only simple point we want to
make from Figure 1 is that the disk and the annulus
models show very similar behaviour in phase vs. UVdistance. The implication is that the visibility phase
distribution is not a strong diagnostic for differentiating
between an annulus or disk.
3.4. Jet self-calibration
We then continue the processing of data using the annular starting model. First, we process the 227.1 GHz
data in an identical manner as was employed at 229.1
GHz, specifically, limiting the CLEAN boxes for regions
around the ring/disk. At both frequencies, a modest extension appears to the Southwest (see Appendix A). As
a check, we also processed the combined frequency data,
but for the four days separately, and again see the extension in all days, although the detailed structure varies
from day to day and frequency to frequency, indicating
the limitations of the data and process, and/or real time
variability (see Appendix A).
We then combined the two frequency datasets, and
continued the self-calibration process, but now extending a single square clean box to 76 µas in full width,
and centered on the disk/ring. This will include the
disk/ring area, and just beyond the disk/ring in all directions, including the modest extension to the southwest. Using a larger, symmetric CLEAN box, centered
on the disk/ring, avoids bias toward generating structure
in any particular direction around the disk/ring. We
performed one more iteration of amplitude and phase
self-calibration. The result is shown in the left panel of
Figure 6. Note that the color scale has been adjusted to
emphasize that the surface brightness at the center of
the disk/ring is still well above the noise (> 10σ).
The ring itself becomes better defined, with a diameter between maxima around the annulus of ∼ 40 µas
to ∼ 44 µas, consistent with the imaging by the EHT
collaboration (Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration
et al. 2019a). In all data sets (days and frequencies;
Section A), the southern half of the ring shows about
a factor two higher surface brightness, although, again,
the details are not exactly identical across days and frequencies. The total flux density in this image is 243 mJy,
with a peak surface brightness of 50.6 mJy beam−1
, an
rms noise of 0.4 mJy beam−1
, and a peak negative sidelobe of −1.5 mJy beam−1
. The rms noise and peak
negative sidelobe in this image is about a factor 1.5 to
2 lower than those shown in Figure 4. Of course, this
image includes two times more data, and further selfcalibration. The modest extension to the southwest becomes more prominent, extending about 60 µas from
the center of the ring at a surface brightness level of ∼ 4
mJy beam−1
.
Initially, we considered the southwest emission to be
a likely artifact of the processing, since the main jet
on arcsecond (ie. kpc) scales in M87 is seen at a position of about +18◦ north of west (= 288◦
east of north;
Walker et al. (2018)). However, we reinspected the latest 90 GHz VLBI images of Kim et al. (2018a) (see also
EHT MWL Science Working Group et al. (2021)). In
these images, the jet on scales below a few milliarcseconds is strongly edge-brightened, with an opening angle
≥ 40◦
. In particular, on scales at the limit of their resolution (beam FWHM = 120 µas × 50 µas, major axis
position axis north-south Kim et al. (2018a)), they find
10 Carilli & Thyagarajan
Figure 6. Image of M87 made with an annulus starting model for combined 227 GHz and 229 GHz data. This image includes
a last iteration of self-calibration including a wider CLEAN box that extends beyond the edge of the ring, symmetric about the
ring center, with a full width of 76 µas. The contour levels are a geometric progression in √
2, starting at 1.5 mJy beam−1
.
Negative contours are dashed. The color scale is in Jy beam−1
, and has been adjusted to show the contrast between the ring
center and the off-source noise. The restoring beam is a Gaussian of FWHM = 22 µas×16 µas, with a major axis position angle
= 25◦
.
in the inner ∼ 200 µas, the brightest limb of the jet extends in the southwest direction from the core, at a position angle of ≈ 15◦
south of west (255◦
east of north),
similar to the observed direction of the extension in Figure 6 (left panel). For reference, we produce an overlay
of the publicly available 90 GHz VLBI image (Kim et al.
2018a), in Figure 7.
Given the very limited Fourier coverage of the EHT
data, we emphasize caution concerning any jet. The
right panel of Figure 8 shows an overlay of the EHT
image with a contour plot of the synthesized beam (PSF)
for these data, where the PSF has been shifted to the
peak surface brightness location around the ring/disk.
The PSF has peak sidelobes of about 59%, located in
two directions: one roughly North-South, and a second
along a position angle that corresponds roughly to the
modest extension to the southwest. Hence, it is possible
the extension is an artefact of the PSF shape for these
observations.
To explore this latter possibility further, we start with
a uniform brightness annulus model, with characteristics (size and uniform surface brightness) guided by the
observational results. We then Fourier transform and
sample this model with the exact UV-sampling of the
EHT data itself. We add thermal noise appropriate for
the array, and we add systematic phase errors at levels
consistent with the large phase corrections we found in
the first iteration of phase self-calibration, with phase
offsets of up to ±100o
(Figure 2). We then process the
corrupted simulated data through the hybrid mapping
procedure in an identical manner as for the real data.
The resulting image is also shown in Figure 8 (right
panel).
The image resulting from this simulated data has a
peak surface brightness, rms noise, and off-source artifacts, similar to the real data. However, the image does
not show any extension in any direction comparable to
what is seen with the actual data itself. At the lowest contour level (about 4σ), there are weak ‘ears’ noticeable in the direction of the southwest-northeast PSF
sidelobes, but again, at a level and size much reduced
relative to the southwest extension seen in the real data.
Overall, the southwest extension is not reproduced
in the simulated data, but it does repeat from day to
day, and frequency to frequency (although not identically) in the real data. On the other hand, the PSF at
both frequencies and all days is comparable (meaning,
all the data have comparable UV-coverage), and one of
the main sidelobes of the PSF is along this southwest
direction. Hence, we cannot be certain of reality of this
extension as a core jet in M87, and encourage further
observations with improved UV-coverage, to verify or
discover any possible core-jet in this important target.
We note recent work by Arras et al. (2020), who
present evidence for a similar southwest extension, independent of (and mutually unknown to) our analysis.
This is not surprising, given we employ the same data.
However, they follow a forward-modeling inference approach, as opposed to our inverse-modeling approach.
They converge on a ring, with a possible extension to
the southwest, and possibly also to the northwest. They
reach the interesting conclusion that the detailed struc-
Hybrid mapping of the ring in M87 11
Figure 7. The black contours are the M87 EHT image at 228 GHz from Figure 6. The color-scale and white contours are the
90 GHz image of M87 at 0.12 mas × 0.050 mas resolution publicly available (Kim et al. 2018b). The relative astrometry was set
by convolving the EHT image to the 90 GHz resolution, and aligning the peaks.
0 10 20 30 40
MicroArc seconds
MicroArc seconds
80 60 40 20 0 -20 -40 -60 -80
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
-100
Figure 8. Left: Image of simulated data generated by starting with a uniform brightness annulus model, sampled with the
same UV-coverage as the EHT data, then adding both systematic phase errors and thermal noise appropriate for these data,
and running through the same hybrid mapping sequence as for the real data. The contour levels are the same as for the real data
in 6. Right: A comparison of the synthesized beam structure, with the ring and possible jet structure from the combined data
in the left panel. The beam peak has been shifted to the peak surface brightness around the ring, to show the position angle
of the PSF sidelobes. The sidelobe peaks are ∼ 59%. The contour levels for the source data (white) start at 1.5 mJy beam−1
,
but now are a geometric progress in two, to avoid overcrowding on the plot, while the PSF contour levels (black) are linear
increments of 20% starting at 20% relative to the peak.
12 Carilli & Thyagarajan
ture around the ring, and of the possible extensions beyond the ring, may be time variable on timescales of
days, although the essential ring-geometry itself is robust from day to day (see also Satapathy et al. (2021)).
Such variability is physically reasonable, given the size
of the regions, and likely relativistic characteristic velocities (Wielgus et al. 2020). Strong variability could
affect any final image made when combining all the data
in the hybrid mapping sequence, and could be a limiting
factor, depending on the level of variability. We discuss
the time variability in Appendix A.
4. DISCUSSION
We have explored a series of simple starting models
within a hybrid mapping process for the EHT VLBI
data on M87 at 1.3mm, to address the simple question:
how do the image results change with starting model,
using traditional tools and techniques of VLBI? We follow consistent steps in all cases, guided by the resulting
models derived from the data at each step.
We find that starting with an annulus or disk model
converges to the images with the lowest noise and residual image artifacts, and best closure phase rms vs. the
data. These images show a clear ring-like structure with
a diameter ' 44 µas, with a central depression, consistent with the results from Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al. (2019a). The other three starting models (point, Gaussian, asymmetric double), produce extended sources of similar size, with internal depressions
within the rough source perimeter, but the images have a
much less well-defined ring-like structure, and generally
poorer image quality metrics. In all cases, the minimum
surface brightness within the source perimeter has a surface brightness well above the noise (> 10σ), and only
a factor 2.5 lower than the minimum around any ring.
These data have insufficient resolution to differentiate
between a true annulus and an edge-brightened disk.
The UV-plot of visibility amplitude vs. uv-distance does
argue for a ring, based on the existence of a mimimum
at ∼ 4 × 109λ, and a second peak at a level more consistent with an annulus than a disk model, although the
UV-coverage is sparse.
Of course, other self-calibration and imaging approaches, such as the forward-modeling approaches of
the EHT collaboration (Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al. 2019a) and the subsequent work in
Arras et al. (2020), apparently converge on a ring-like
morphology. Looked at in isolation, our results favor a
ring-like morphology based on the improved quality of
the final images relative to other starting models, and
on the UV-plot itself, but also show that varying the
starting model in the hybrid mapping sequence can lead
to more complex structures that may have internal depressions, but that are at best only marginally ring-like.
This latter conclusion could be due to the limitations in
the adopted hybrid mapping process, or in the Fourier
spacing coverage by the UV-data.
Combining data at 227.1 GHz and 229.1 GHz, our best
image (lowest noise and residuals), shows a ring-like (or
edge-brightened disk), surface brightness distribution
with a factor two higher brightness in the south than the
north, as was also seen in the analyses of (Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al. 2019a; Arras et al.
2020). Investigation of individual days and frequencies
shows differences in the detailed surface brightness distributions. Given the physical scale of the regions being
imaged in the vicinity of a supermassive black hole (just
a few gravitational radii), the characteristic dynamical
velocities will be relativistic. Hence, any structures moving or changing at an apparent speed approaching the
speed of light, could vary on timescales of days (Wielgus
et al. 2020; Arras et al. 2020; Satapathy et al. 2021).
With further processing, we find evidence for an extension to the ring of about a 60 µas distance from the
ring center in the southwest direction (also recently presented in Arras et al. 2020). This direction is consistent
with the brightest southern limb of the M87 jet seen at
3 mm at a factor of few lower resolution (Kim et al.
2018a). However, we emphasize caution, since this extension is situated along the same position angle of one
of the main sidelobes of the synthesized beam. The coverage of the Fourier plane for the EHT data is sparse,
implying that the synthesized beam has peak sidelobes
of ∼59% along two directions, one of which, again, is
toward the southwest.
A very recent paper presents a magnetohydrodynamic
model for jet formation in M87, in which a core-jet
brightness enhancement could arise in the vicinity of
the southwest region of the disk, where the fractional
polarization is maximum (Punsly & Chen 2021; Event
Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al. 2021b,c). They
propose the existence of: ‘a Parker spiral magnetic field,
characteristic of a wind or jet, consistent with the observed EHT polarization pattern. Even though there
is no image of the jet connecting with the annulus, it
is argued that these circumstances are not coincidental
and the polarized portion of the EHT emission is mainly
jet emission in the top layers of the disk that is diluted
by emission from an underlying turbulent disk.’ Unfortunately, evidence for this southwest extension remains
suspect. It remains paramount to obtain further high
frequency observations of this region with better UVcoverage to test jet formation models on the scales of a
few gravitational radii.
Hybrid mapping of the ring in M87 13
0 10 20
Hybrid mapping of the ring in M87
30 40
15
MicroArc seconds
MicroArc seconds
80 60 40 20 0 -20 -40 -60 -80
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
0 10 20 30 40
MicroArc seconds
MicroArc seconds
80 60 40 20 0 -20 -40 -60 -80
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
227 GHz 229 GHz
Figure 9. Images of M87 at 227.1 GHz and 229.1 GHz, made with an annulus starting model and a hybrid imaging process with
CLEAN boxes over the main ring/disk area. The contour levels are a geometric progression in √
2, starting at 1.5 mJy beam−1
.
Negative contours are dashed. The greyscale range is −1 mJy beam−1
to 45 mJy beam−1
.
APPENDIX
A. RESULTS FROM DIFFERENT FREQUENCIES AND DAYS
Figure 9 shows the results for the two frequencies, 227 GHz and 229 GHz, starting with an annular model, and after
self-calibration restricting the CLEAN boxes to the region defined by the ring/disk. In both cases, the southeastern
part of the ring shows about a factor two higher surface brightness than in the north, although the details change
between frequencies, which is an indication of the limitations of the data and process. The southwest extension is also
seen in both cases at a similar level.
A second check we performed was to image the combined frequency data, but for each day separately, using the same
CLEAN procedure as for Figure 9. The results are shown in Figure 10. In all cases, the disk/ring remains dominant.
The most prominent emission beyond the ring is the extension to the southwest, although the details of the extension
vary from day to day. In particular, the possible southwest extension gets systematically weaker over the six days
spanned by the observations.
Again, Arras et al. (2020) present evidence for the southwest extension, independent of (and mutually unknown to)
our analysis. They also conclude that the structure inside and outside the ring is likely time variable, although not to
the degree to lose the essential ring-structure itself (see also Satapathy et al. (2021)). The analysis of Wielgus et al.
(2020) suggests that brightness enhancements and changes in M87 could be variable on timescales of days close to a
supermassive black hole event horizon. For reference, at the distance of M87, apparent transverse component motion
at the speed of light would correspond to a displacement of 11 µas per day.
Variability from day to day could affect the hybrid mapping self-calibration process for combined data. We have
summed the four images for each day separately shown in Figure 10, and the result is almost identical to the image
made by summing the uv-data in the hybrid imaging process (Figure 6). This implies that any variability is not large
enough to seriously affect the self-calibration process at the signal-to-noise levels of the current data.
16 Carilli & Thyagarajan
0 10 20 30 40
MicroArc seconds
MicroArc seconds
80 60 40 20 0 -20 -40 -60 -80
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
0 10 20 30 40
MicroArc seconds
MicroArc seconds 80 60 40 20 0 -20 -40 -60 -80
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
0 10 20 30 40
MicroArc seconds
MicroArc seconds
80 60 40 20 0 -20 -40 -60 -80
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
0 10 20 30 40
MicroArc seconds
MicroArc seconds
80 60 40 20 0 -20 -40 -60 -80
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
Figure 10. Images of M87 made by combining 227.1 GHz and 229.1 GHz EHT data using an annulus starting model, but for
the four days separately, from April 5 to April 11, 2017. The CLEAN box is the same as that used in Figure 9. The contour
levels are the same in all images, being a geometric progression in √
2, starting at 2 mJy beam−1
. Negative contours are dashed.
The greyscale range is -0.001 mJy beam−1
to 45 mJy beam−1
. The restoring beam is a Gaussian of FWHM = 22µas × 16µas,
with a major axis position angle = 25◦
.
