Cosmic backgrounds from the radio to the far-infrared: recent results
and perspectives from cosmological and astrophysical surveys∗
Cosmological and astrophysical surveys in various wavebands, in particular from the radio to the far-infrared, offer a unique view of the universe’s properties and the formation
and evolution of its structures. After a preamble on the so-called tension problem, which
occurs when different types of data are used to determine cosmological parameters, we
discuss the role of fast radio bursts in cosmology, in particular for the missing baryon
problem, and the perspectives from the analysis of the 21 cm redshifted line from neutral
∗Based on talks presented at the Sixteenth Marcel Grossmann Meeting on General Relativity, July
2021.
†
Istituto Nazionale di Astrofisica – Istituto di Radioastronomia, Via Piero Gobetti 101, 40129
Bologna, Italy
arXiv:2111.11472v1 [astro-ph.CO] 22 Nov 2021
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 2
2
hydrogen. We then describe the Planck Legacy Archive, its wealth of scientific information and next developments, and the promising perspectives expected from higher resolution observations, in particular for the analysis of the thermal Sunyaev-Zel’dovich effect.
Three cosmological results of the Planck mission are presented next: the implications
of the map of Comptonization fluctuations, the dipole analysis from cross-correlating
cosmic microwave background anisotropy and Comptonization fluctuation maps, and
the constraints on the primordial tensor-to-scalar perturbation ratio. Finally, we discuss
some future perspectives and alternative scenarios in cosmology, such as the study of the
Lorentz invariance violation with the cosmic microwave background polarization, the
introduction of new gravitational degrees of freedom to solve the dark matter problem,
and the exploitation of the magnification bias with high-redshift sub-millimeter galaxies
to constrain cosmological parameters.
Keywords: Cosmology; background radiations; observational cosmology; radio, microwave; submillimeter; infrared emission; large-scale structure of the universe; galaxy
clusters; radio sources; IR sources; gravitational lenses and luminous arcs; relativity
and gravitation; modified theories of gravity; dark matter; special relativity; radiation
mechanisms, polarization.
1. Introduction
Over the last century or so, cosmology has progressed from a field that was essentially philosophy to a precision science. The current standard cosmological model
is the Λ cold dark matter (ΛCDM) model, which mainly consists of a cosmological
constant (Λ) or dark energy (DE) component and cold dark matter (CDM) component, with general relativity (GR) as the assumed theory of gravity. It makes
predictions on the smallest and largest scales, that, despite some open questions,
are largely verified by a host of observational cosmology experiments.
Cosmological and astrophysical surveys in various wavebands, in particular from
the radio to the far-infrared, are crucial to solve many problems in cosmology and
to understand the origin and evolution of the cosmic structures at various scales
through cosmic time. The accurate observations of the properties of the cosmic
microwave background (CMB) began the era of precision cosmology, furthering
our understanding of the early universe and its evolution up to the present time
and beyond. Similarly, the information contained in the radio sky is of increasing
relevance to unravel the complexity of cosmic evolution and to answer a wide range
of open questions, thanks to the spectacular experimental improvement achieved in
the past years and expected in the future.
The structure of this paper is as follows. In Sect. 2, we begin with a preamble to
the so-called tension problem, which occurs when different data are used to determine cosmological parameters. We then discuss the role of fast radio bursts (FRBs)
in cosmology to solve the missing baryons problem, followed by the perspectives
represented by the analysis of the 21 cm redshifted line from neutral hydrogen (HI).
Sect. 3 describes the wealth of scientific information and tools publicly available at
the Planck Legacy Archive (PLA), with its current and future developments, and
the perspectives expected from higher resolution observations at millimeter (mm)
and sub-mm wavelengths, in particular for the analysis of the thermal Sunyaev-
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 3
3
Zel’dovich (SZ) effect towards galaxy clusters (GCs), focusing on a forthcoming
well-defined facility instrument. In Sect. 4 we discuss three important cosmological
results based on the data from the Planck mission: the implications of the analysis of
the thermal SZ (tSZ) map, the dipole analysis based on the cross-correlation of CMB
anisotropy and tSZ maps, and the constraints on the ratio between the primordial
tensor and scalar perturbations. Finally, Sect. 5 is dedicated to future perspectives
and alternative scenarios in cosmology. We consider three specific examples: the
study of Lorentz invariance violation with the analysis of CMB polarization, the
solution to the dark matter (DM) problem introducing new gravitational degrees of
freedom, and the exploitation of the magnification bias with high-z sub-mm galaxies
to constrain a set of cosmological parameters.
2. Cosmology in the radio
2.1. Cosmology with radio astrophysics and tensions in cosmology
Amongst the successes of modern cosmology, is the remarkable precision in the
estimation of the cosmological parameters that describe the contents, geometry and
history of our universe. Herein also lies the current greatest tension in the data.
Indeed, in spite of the increasing precision in observational cosmology, it is possible
we have lost some accuracy: a number of tensions now appear within our data,
tensions that more cosmology experiments do not appear to solve. These tensions
may require a change in the underlying theory or they may be resolved with novel
observational probes of the large scale picture of the universe. Here we will describe
an example of the latter, namely, the FRBs, the novel discovery of our century, as
potential instruments for cosmology. Indeed we will highlight more broadly the use
of radio astrophysics - encompassing both the use of radio transients and intensity
mapping tools, and the potential they hold for groundbreaking cosmology discovery.
The Hubble constant, H0, is anything but constant across observations at different scales (see Ref. 1 for a recent review of most of the data). A brief summary
however, is that historically there were two independent measures for H0, very far
apart in value with measurements of roughly 50 km s−1 Mpc−1 or 100 km s−1 Mpc−1
from the early and late universe respectively. However, the error bars on each measurement was large enough, that each was within errors of the other and it was
assumed that with improved observations, the error bars would get smaller and the
values would get closer and converge. Indeed, this appeared to be the case early this
century, but every new data set over the last several years has the values diverging
with ever smaller error bars, that critically no longer allow for a simple convergence in the value of H0. Measurements from the early universe, such as Planck,
Dark Energy Survey 2,3 (DES), and baryonic acoustic oscillations (BAO) and Big
Bang nucleosynthesis (BBN) observations, all point to a smaller value of around
H0 ' 67 km s−1 Mpc−1 and measurements from the late universe, using Cepheids
as distance ladders, or lensing for example, find H0 ' 73 km s−1 Mpc−1 with each
measurement having error bars in the range '1÷4 km s−1 Mpc−1
. Thus this tension
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 4
4
is growing with data rather than resolving.
There are longer standing issues with the standard cosmological model, of course,
the lack of direct observational evidence for DM which makes up roughly 25% of
the total energy budget of the universe is of particular concern. No less resolved is
the issue of DE, here making up ∼ 70% of the energy budget of the universe and
yet only observed in indirect cosmological experiments with no direct detection and
also no compelling theoretical explanation for why it even exists or why it appears
to be dominating the total energy budget of the universe at a cosmological time
when we are both possible and here to observe it. Early universe inflation is a key
component in the model, solving several open problems such as the flatness and
horizon problems and yet we still have no theory of inflation that fits within an
ultraviolet complete theory with a natural candidate for the inflaton lacking. One
hopes that these three problems are resolved together with a leap in the theory
space - yet the obligation remains to continue to search for observational data that
may yet play a role.
Other problems have lingered for very long, such as the missing baryon problem,
where even the ∼ 5% of the universe that we know exists is not entirely accounted
for. Indeed adding up all of the observed contributions to the baryons accounts
for only ∼ 70% of the total expected. Roughly 30% are considered missing, and
expected to be somewhere in the warm hot intergalactic medium (WHIM). Indeed,
we should say were considered missing, as we discuss below how to find these missing
baryons using the FRBs.
2.1.1. Fast radio bursts and their role in cosmology
As the name suggests, FRBs are very bright (∼ Jy), brief (∼µs to ∼ ms scale)
transients, observed in the broad spectrum of the radio. The first was discovered 4
in 2007 and ever since the search has been on to discover more and their properties,
first through searches in archival data and more recently through purpose built
radio telescopes and arrays to find thousands if not tens of thousands of bursts
every year. Our understanding of the properties of FRBs is still evolving; it appears
that many but not all repeat, it is not yet known if any of the repeaters repeat in
a periodic fashion, and indeed it is likely that ultimately FRBs will fall in several
classes as has happened with transients historically. Their other properties such
as polarisation, rotation measures etc are all still unknown as the observations
do not all point to a single pattern and it is not always possible to disentangle
host galaxy effects from propagation effects from intrinsic properties of the bursts.
It does appear certain that they are found in host galaxies, and that they lie at
cosmological distances, 5
thus making them excellent candidates for cosmology as
their propagation will probe the intergalactic medium (IGM) and thus give us a
number of novel ways to constrain cosmological parameters (see, e.g., Refs. 6–8
and references therein). From a theoretical standpoint, the progenitor mechanism
driving FRBs is not yet known though there are strong hints that at least some
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 5
5
are driven by magnetars through one of many physical possible mechanisms. A full
database of theories, 9 once outnumbered the observations, but as the amount of
data grows, the possibilities for theoretical explanations shrinks and so it is likely
that in a few years we will have only a handful of possible contenders remaining,
perhaps matching future classes of FRBs.
There are a number of ways FRBs can be used as cosmological probes. Here we
focus on a single application. After emission from the source, the photons from the
burst travel to the observer through the IGM, and are slowed down differentially
as a function of their wavelength, λ, or frequency, ν = c/λ, c being the speed of
light. The dispersion measure, MD '
R
nedl, where ne is the electron number
density and the integral along the line of sight runs from the source to the observer,
thus contains cosmological information about the distribution of electrons Indeed,
this simple equation combined with precision cosmology constraints from the early
universe allows us to make a prediction for the fraction of baryons in the IGM, 7
which can then be experimentally verified. Indeed, the so-called missing baryon
problem is not longer an outstanding problem as the results of Ref. 10 used a handful
of well located FRBs with the observed dispersion measures to show that indeed
the missing baryons are in the IGM as expected, and are playing the predicted
role of dispersing the FRB signal. This longstanding open problem is thus resolved
not due to any great technological or theoretical breakthrough, but simply through
the use of a few transient observations and an understanding of the contributions
to MD from our own galaxy. This suggests that there is immense and untapped
potential for great discovery with FRBs and that the future is very bright for this
young field.
2.2. High-redshift universe with redshifted 21 cm line
The redshifted 21 cm line of HI is one of the most useful probes of the early universe. Several experiments are ongoing and are being planned to detect the signal
at high redshift, z. Detection of the signal will help in understanding the first stars
in the universe, the formation and evolution of galaxies and also constraining cosmological parameters. This section summarizes the status of observational efforts
and theoretical understanding.
The HI evolution can be used to study the thermal and ionization history of the
universe and also the evolution of the galaxies. 11,12 The very first HI atoms formed
during the so-called ‘recombination’ epoch. The hydrogen remains in the neutral
form until the first stars form which can then start ionizing the HI in the IGM,
a process known as reionization. This epoch is believed to end around redshifts
z ∼ 5.5 by when almost all the HI in the IGM gets ionized. In the post-reionization
era, the only regions where HI can survive are the high-density regions, e.g., the
interstellar medium (ISM) of the galaxies.
The evolution of HI can be efficiently tracked by the redshifted 21 cm signal
arising from hyperfine transition of the ground state of the atom. The signal is
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 6
6
observed, either in emission or absorption, in contrast to the CMB signal using lowfrequency radio telescopes. Since the hyperfine transition is forbidden, the signal
amplitude turns out to be extremely weak and hence is appreciable only when the
HI density is significant. There are broadly three regimes where the detection of the
21 cm radiation is being planned: (i) the cosmic dawn when the ultraviolet (UV)
and X-ray radiation from the very early galaxies lead to a strong absorption signal
around z ∼ 20; (ii) the epoch of reionization when the heated and ionized IGM
leads to an emission signal around z ∼ 15 − 6; and (iii) the post-reionization signal
when HI in galaxies can be detected either directly or through intensity mapping.
Among the different ways to detect the 21 cm signal, perhaps the one that requires simplest of the instruments is the signal averaged over large regions of the
sky, i.e., the global signal. This signal is believed to be most prominent during the
cosmic dawn corresponding to ν ' 50 − 100 MHz. The amplitude of the cosmological signal is weak and is buried under other astrophysical signals few orders of
magnitude stronger, which makes it extremely challenging to separate it out.
Recently, there has been a claim of a detection of the 21 cm signal from cosmic
dawn at z ∼ 18 by the Experiment to Detect the Global EoR Signature 26 (EDGES),
although the recovered signal seems to be 3 − 4 times larger than that predicted
by standard galaxy formation models. This lead to several theoretical interpretation beyond the standard calculations, e.g., exotic physics in the DM sector 27 or
6 7 8 9 10 11 12
101
103
105
k ∼ 0.1 h cMpc−1
GMRT: Paciga et al. (2013)
HERA: HERA Collaboration (2021)
LOFAR: Patil et al. (2017)
LOFAR: Mertens et al. (2020)
MWA: Dillon et al. (2014)
MWA: Dillon et al. (2015)
MWA: Beardsley et al. (2016)
MWA: Paul et al. (2016)
MWA: Barry et al. (2019)
PAPER: Kolopanis et al. (2019)
6 7 8 9 10 11 12
101
103
21 cm power spectrum
∆21(k) [mK]
k ∼ 0.3 h cMpc−1
HERA: HERA Collaboration (2021)
MWA: Dillon et al. (2014)
MWA: Li et al. (2019)
MWA: Trott et al. (2020)
PAPER: Kolopanis et al. (2019)
6 7 8 9 10 11 12
redshift z
101
103
k ∼ 0.5 h cMpc−1
GMRT: Paciga et al. (2013)
LOFAR: Mertens et al. (2020)
MWA: Dillon et al. (2014)
MWA: Dillon et al. (2015)
MWA: Beardsley et al. (2016)
MWA: Paul et al. (2016)
MWA: Barry et al. (2019)
MWA: Li et al. (2019)
MWA: Trott et al. (2020)
PAPER: Kolopanis et al. (2019)
Fig. 1. Observational upper limits to the 21 cm PS, p
k
3P21(k)/2π2, for three different comoving
wavenumbers k; here h = H0/ (100 km s−1 Mpc−1
) and cMpc denotes comoving Mpc. Data
from different telescopes, namely, the Giant Metrewave Radio Telescope 13 (GMRT), the Low
Frequency Array 14,15 (LOFAR), the Murchison Widefield Array 16–22 (MWA), the Precision Array
for Probing the Epoch of Reionization 23 (PAPER), the Hydrogen Epoch of Reionization 24 Array
(HERA), are shown in comparison with the signal predictions from the Semi-numerical Code for
ReIonization with PhoTon-conservation 25 (SCRIPT).
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 7
7
strong radio background from the first galaxies. 28–30 There have also been concerns
regarding the foreground subtraction and other systematics in the data, 31 hence it
is important to validate the signal through other low-frequency telescopes.
An alternate way of detecting the 21 cm signal is through the spatial fluctuations. These can, in principle, be useful throughout the cosmic history starting
from the cosmic dawn to the post-reionization universe. During the cosmic dawn,
the fluctuations arise from those in the galactic radiation, while in the epoch reionization it is the patchiness in the ionization field that drives the 21 cm fluctuation
signal. In the post-reionization era, the fluctuations in the 21 cm signal essentially
trace the distribution of galaxies and hence the underlying matter fluctuations.
At present, a number of low-frequency interferometers are attempting to detect the 21 cm power spectrum (PS) from the epoch of reionization at scales
∼ 10h
−1
cMpc. Fig. 1 shows the current upper limits (see Ref. 32 for a complete compilation of available data). These observational attempts are ably complemented by numerical and semi-numerical theoretical models to help interpret the
data. The result from the one such semi-numerical simulation SCRIPTa
is shown in
Fig. 1 for a model of reionization consistent with all other available observations. 25
Upcoming facilities like the Square Kilometre Arrayb
(SKA) will be able to reach
a noise level of ∼ 1 mK (∼ 0.3 mK) within ∼ 100 (1000) hours of observations and
hence should constrain reionization models with high statistical significance.
3. Observational results and perspectives in the microwaves
3.1. The Planck Legacy Archive, present and future
Planck was an ESA space satellite that measured the microwave sky in nine wavebands, allowing it to not only capture the CMB to incredible precision, but also to
accurately study a number of astrophysical diffuse emissions and discrete sources
(see fig. 51 in Ref. 33, which shows the various wavebands of the Planck satellite,
as well as the foregrounds signals and their frequency spectra across those bands).
The PLA hosts and serves over 150 TB of products from Planck that are publicly
available via the PLA web interfacec
(Fig. 2). This interface provides direct access
to the users to a wide variety of products of the Planck Collaborationd
through the
Low Frequency Instrument (LFI) Data Processing Centre (DPC) in Trieste, Italy,
by the High Frequency Instrument (HFI) DPC in Paris, France, and, more recently,
ahttps://bitbucket.org/rctirthankar/script
bhttps://www.skatelescope.org
chttps://pla.esac.esa.int
dThe Planck Collaboration acknowledges the support of: ESA; CNES, and CNRS/INSU-IN2P3-
INP (France); ASI, CNR, and INAF (Italy); NASA and DoE (USA); STFC and UKSA (UK);
CSIC, MINECO, JA, and RES (Spain); Tekes, AoF, and CSC (Finland); DLR and MPG (Germany); CSA (Canada); DTU Space (Denmark); SER/SSO (Switzerland); RCN (Norway); SFI
(Ireland); FCT/MCTES (Portugal); ERC and PRACE (EU). A description of the Planck Collaboration and a list of its members, indicating which technical or scientific activities they have been
involved in, can be found at http://www.cosmos.esa.int/web/planck/planck-collaboration.
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 8
8
Fig. 2. Left: the Planck Legacy Archive home page.
by the US Planck Data Center in Pasadena and Berkeley, California, USA. The
PLA is located at the European Space Astronomy Centre (ESAC) near Madrid,
Spain, and is maintained by the Data Science and Archives Division personnel.
In the last years, four major releases of Planck products have taken place, providing users with the most complete cosmology data set to date.
The Planck products can be divided into various categories. First, the timeordered data, that comes in multiple flavors: raw, semi-calibrated and calibrated
science ready timelines and compressed timelines (called HPRs). Second, the frequency maps produced by the DPCs, in most cases for each detector, detector
pair and frequency, and for different combinations of the mission coverage (e.g.,
yearly maps, nominal mission, half-mission, half-ring, full mission, etc); third, the
maps of the CMB; and, fourth, the so-called astrophysical component maps that
contain the diffuse emission from our Galaxy as produced by the dust grains, synchrotron emission from spiraling electrons moving along the magnetic field lines,
cosmic infrared background (CIB), etc. See Fig. 3, left panel. These CMB and
astrophysical maps are derived in the scheme offered by the Hierarchical Equal
Area isoLatitude Pixelization of a sphere 34 (HEALPix) using different component
separation methods, e.g., Commander, Spectral Matching Independent Component
Analysis (SMICA), Spectral Estimation Via Expectation Maximisation (SEVEM) and
Generalized Needlet Internal Linear Combination (GNILC), the four official component separation methods used to extract the CMB maps in the third Planck Release
(PR3). Fifth, source catalogues in various forms, from Galactic and extragalactic
compact source catalogues, available in the Planck Catalogue of Compact Sources
(PCCS), to galactic cold cores, SZ GCs, high-z lensing candidates, etc (Fig. 3, right
panel). Sixth, cosmology products, e.g., the Planck likelihood code and associated
files, the different flavors of the Planck CMB angular PS as a function of the multipole ` (e.g., low-`, high-`, temperature-only, temperature and polarization, etc),
lensing products and more (Fig. 4, left panel).
Advance Search panels are available to extensively query the PLA database, in
addition to embedded links to the Planck Explanatory Supplement documentation,e
ehttps://wiki.cosmos.esa.int/planck-legacy-archive
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 9
9
Fig. 3. Left: the Planck maps area in the PLA, with emphasis to the astrophysical components,
and in particular to the Galaxy dust emission. Right: the Planck source catalogues area in the
PLA, with emphasis to the PCCS.
Fig. 4. Left: the Planck cosmology products area in the PLA, with emphasis to the CMB angular
PS. Right: the Planck Sky Model simulation tool area in the PLA.
multiple data download options, and Helpdesk support.
Three major releases of Planck products took place in 2013, 2015, and 2018
and a selection of products have been tagged as “Legacy” to identify the version
of each product most appropriate for general scientific use. In 2021 a new release
of products will take place with a joint reprocessing of LFI+HFI time-ordered data
that includes additional information not used in previous releases. In addition, EU
funded projects reprocessing Planck data, or combining it with other experiments,
are expected to the deliver to the PLA higher level data products of interest. The
PLA also offers specialized tools that facilitate the processing of Planck products.
These tools are mainly designed to help users who are not familiar with some of
the particularities of the Planck products, and can be categorized into distinct
groups: map operations including component subtraction, unit conversion, colour
correction, bandpass transformation, and masking of map-cutouts/full-sky maps;
component separation codes, map-making codes and effective beam-averaging. In
addition, the PLA includes an interface to the latest version of the Planck Sky
Model simulation tool (Fig. 4, right panel), with a simple user interface that allows
users to simulate the microwave/sub-mm sky with Planck, as well as future CMB
experiments and custom-defined instruments.
In the coming years it is planned to continue releasing data products from improved reprocessing of Planck data and combining Planck with other experiments.
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 10
10
3.2. High angular resolution SZ observations with MISTRAL
High angular resolution mm observations are key to understand a wide variety
of scientific cases. Among the others, the interaction of CMB photons with the
hot electron gas in GCs and surrounding medium promises to study GCs and their
deviation from relaxed behaviour. When the CMB photons scatter off a hot electron
gas, for example in GCs, in fact, they undergo inverse Compton scattering which is
visible in the frequency spectrum of the CMB. The resulting distorted spectrum is
∆I(x)
I0
= y
x
4
e
x
(e
x − 1)2

x coth x
2
− 4

= yg(x), (1)
where I0 = (2hP /c2
)(kBTCMB/hP )
3
, TCMB is the CMB temperature, x =
hP ν/(kBTCMB) is the dimensionless frequency, and y =
R
neσT kBTe/(mec
2
)dl is
the Comptonization parameter, the integral along the line of sight of the electron
density ne multiplied by the electron temperature Te; σT is cross-section of Thomson scattering, kB and hP are the Boltzmann and Planck constants. This is the
tSZ effect 35,36 and it can be used to study both relaxed and non-relaxed GCs. In
fact, GCs can experience a wide variety of situation including collisions, merging,
and non-relaxed situation. In addition, not only GCs can host relativistic electrons.
Hydrodynamical simulations 37,38 suggested that GCs occupy the knots of the so
called cosmic web (CW) and WHIM is disposed connecting GCs forming filaments
that could be seen through the SZ effect itself.
An instrument being prepared for such scientific cases is the MIllimeter Sardinia
radio Telescope Receiver based on Array of Lumped elements kids 39 (MISTRAL),
to be fielded at the 64m Sardinia Radio Telescopef
(SRT). MISTRAL will use an
array of 408 kinetic inductance detectors (KIDs) with a field of view of 40 and an
angular resolution of ∼ 1200. It is a cryogenic instrument with detectors cooled down
at 270 mK and with frequency domain multiplexing (FDM), Reconfigurable Open
Architecture Computing Hardware 2 (ROACH2) based read-out.
MISTRAL is a facility instrument to be installed at the SRT in 2022. It operates
in an atmospheric window in the frequency range 78÷103 GHz, namely W-band,
that is interesting for a number of scientific reasons, and most importantly it provides low optical depth and allows high efficiency observations. It will be installed
in the Gregorian room of the SRT (Fig. 5).
MISTRAL consists of a cryostat, being constructed by Queen Mary College
(QMC) Instruments,g with a Pulse Tube (PT) cryocooler, an He-10 sorption refrigerator, custom optics and detectors. In order to have the PT heads as close
as possible to vertical position during observations, we have positioned the head
with an inclination of 57.5◦ with respect to the focal plane. This allows observation elevations in the range of 32.5◦÷82.5◦ with no degradation of the thermal
performance.
fhttp://www.srt.inaf.it
ghttp://www.terahertz.co.uk/qmc-instruments-ltd
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 11
11
Fig. 5. Left: SRT Turret with MISTRAL installed. Right: a cut of MISTRAL cryostat highlighting the main parts. Acknowledgement: MISTRAL Collaboration.
The optical design of MISTRAL includes a set of radiation quasi-optical filters,
anchored at the different thermal stages of the cryostat, an Anti Reflection Coated
(ARC) Ultra High Molecular Weight (UHMW) polyetilene window, and two Silicon
lenses able to image the Gregorian Focus on the array of detectors. Detectors are
coupled to radiation through open space (filled array) so cryogenic cold stop, placed
in between the two lenses, is needed.
MISTRAL will take advantage of the high sensitivity and capability of FDM
of KIDs cryogenic detectors. KIDs are superconductive detectors where mm radiation with higher energy with respect to the Cooper pair binding energy, can break
Cooper pairs producing a change in the population densities and thus in the kinetic
inductance. In fact, the inductance L of a thin superconductor is dominated by
the kinetic inductance Lk, which depends on the Cooper pair density. The detector array is composed of 408 KIDs detectors. They are 3 mm × 3 mm each and are
arranged on an equilateral triangle every 4.2 mm on a 4 inches silicon wafer. They
sample the focal plane with a full width half maximum (FWHM) angular spacing
of 10.6
00 lower the each pixel angular resolution. The ROACH2 based FDM, originally developed for the Osservatorio nel Lontano Infrarosso Montato su Pallone
Orientabileh
(OLIMPO) experiment, 40,41 will be used.
MISTRAL will be a facility instrument: it will be open to the scientific community to decide what kind of scientific output it can achieve and propose the
observations to the Time Allocation Committee of the SRT. Nevertheless, we will
list some scientific cases below, including those we find most interesting.
Protoplanetary discs mm measurements in star forming regions allow to break
the degeneracy present in infrared (IR) measurements due to the optically thick
nature of the hot inner disc. 42 Observations of star formation in molecular clouds
with high enough angular resolution allow to distinguish starless cores with respect
to those hosting protostars. 43 Continuum resolved galaxies observations can give
hFar Infrared Observatory Mounted on Orientable Balloon. See http://olimpo.roma1.infn.it.
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 12
12
information about morphology and radial profiles, e.g., gas column profiles, dust
temperature profiles. 44 Spatially resolved high-z radio galaxies can provide information about cold dust re-emission. 45
What is probably the most impacting expected result of MISTRAL is the possibility to observe and resolve the SZ effect through GCs and surrounding medium.
With respect to moderate to low angular resolution observations, high (' 1000) etections can investigate non relaxed GCs, study merging GCs, understanding the self
similarities of GCs, their identical appearance regardless of their mass or distance.
Study the pressure profiles and understand the active galactic nuclei (AGN) feedback expected in some environments. Often GCs are assumed to be spherical and
isothermal. Nevertheless, they interact, collide and merge, bringing to important
degeneracies and deviation from specific models. High angular resolution SZ measurements allow to disentangle between models and to identify the most appropriate
ones. Even relaxed GCs experience pressure fluctuations and compressions of the
intra cluster medium which would be interesting to study.
GCs experience hierarchical growth through mergers. Pre-mergers GCs should
be connected through the CW and simulations endorse this. 37,38 WHIM are expected to be distributed as over-densities in filamentary structures between GCs:
high angular resolution SZ measurements can detect WHIM better than X-ray under low density circumstances. This is probably the most challenging and most
rewarding of the achievements that an experiment like MISTRAL can achieve.
4. Planck cosmological implications
4.1. New Planck thermal SZ map and its cosmological analysis
The ΛCDM model provides a wonderful fit to many cosmological data. However, a slight discrepancy was found in the latest data analyses between the CMB
anisotropies (z ∼ 1100) and other cosmological probes at low (z ∼ 0 ÷ 1) redshift, z, for the S8(≡ σ8(ΩM/0.3)0.5
) cosmological parameter representing the amplitude of the structure growth in the universe; here ΩM and σ8 are the usual
non-relativistic matter density parameter and the density contrast on a scale of 8
[H0/(100 km s−1 Mpc−1
)]−1 Mpc.
For example, the S8 value was precisely measured to be S8 = 0.830±0.013 with
the Planck CMB observation. 46 However, a lower value of S8 ∼ 0.77 ± 0.03 was
measured using the population of GCs detected by Planck at low-z
47,48 (z < 0.6),
thus called “S8 tension”. Furthermore, other low-z observations with gravitational
lensing by the Kilo-Degree Survey 49 (KiDS) and DES experiments also found lower
S8 values. These results indicate that the cosmic structure growth is slower than
the prediction based on the CMB measurement and may demand modifications to
the standard cosmological model to explain all these measurements.
One of the most interesting signals extensively studied with Planck is the tSZ
effect, which produces what are known as y distortions, or y type signals. These
primarily come from CMB photons being inverse-Compton scattered through hot
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 13
13
Fig. 6. Top: Orthographic projections of the all-sky Compton y parameter maps reconstructed
with MILCA (left) and in 2015 50 (right), with appreciable differences in the striping features. Pixel
resolution changed for visualization purposes from Nside = 2048 to Nside = 128 (i.e. from ' 1.720
to ' 27.480 pixel size), according to the sky pixelization in Ref. 34. Bottom: Cross-PS (black)
fitted with the tSZ (red) and foreground models, namely the CIB (green), radio (blue) and IR
(cyan) sources, plus noise (yellow), the sum of the tSZ, foreground models and noise being shown in
red dashed line (left); posterior distribution of the cosmological parameters σ8 and ΩM, with 68%
and 95% confidence level (CL) interval contours obtained from our cosmological analysis (right),
compared with the Planck CMB’s (gray), KiDS-1000 3x2pt (blue), and DES Y1 3x2pt results
(green). Acknowledgements: H. Tanimura, M. Douspis, N. Aghanim (CNRS/Univ. Paris-Saclay).
GCs (see Sect. 3.2), which makes holes, or lowers the flux of low frequency photons
and up scatters, or makes an excess flux of high frequency photons.
The tSZ signal is subdominant relative to the CMB and other foreground emissions in the Planck bands. Thus a tailored component separation algorithm is
required to reconstruct the tSZ map. We adopted the Modified Internal Linear
Combination Algorithm51 (MILCA) used for the Planck y-map reconstruction in
2015 and applied it to the 100 to 857 GHz frequency channel maps (see Sect. 3.1)
from the fourth Planck Release (PR4).
The Planck PR4 data implemented several improvements from the previous
version: the usage of foreground polarization priors during the calibration stage to
break scanning-induced degeneracies, the correction of bandpass mismatch at all
frequencies, the inclusion of 8% of data collected during repointing maneuvers, etc.
With these improvements we produced a new y-map with smaller noises (by ∼7%)
and reduced strips than the previous version released in 2015 (Fig. 6, top panels).
We also reconstructed two y-maps from the first and last halves of the data for
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 14
14
a cosmological analysis and considered a cross-angular PS between these y-maps to
avoid the bias induced by the noise in the auto-angular PS (see Ref. 52 for more
details). This tSZ cross-PS is affected by residual foreground emissions from radio
and IR point sources and CIB emission. Thus we fitted our measurement with the
cosmology-dependent tSZ model, including the radio and IR point source models, 53
the CIB model 54 and the noise (Fig. 6, left bottom panel).
The cosmological analysis of the tSZ cross-PS allowed us to set constraints
on cosmological parameters, mainly of the S8 parameter. We obtained S8 =
0.764 +0.015
−0.018 (statistical)
+0.031
−0.016 (systematic), in which the systematic uncertainty includes the contributions from the mass bias and pressure profile model. Our obtained S8 value is fully consistent with recent weak lensing results from KiDS and
DES. It is also consistent with the Planck CMB’s result 46 within 2σ, while it is
slightly lower by ∼1.7σ (Fig. 6, right bottom panel).
4.2. The CMB dipole and the thermal SZ effect: Eppur Si Muove
The largest temperature anisotropy in the CMB is the dipole pattern at ` = 1. The
simplest interpretation of the dipole is that it is due to our motion with respect to the
rest frame of the CMB (with debate over the possibility of alternative explanations),
and is measured to be β = v/c = (1.23357 ± 0.00036) × 10−3
in the direction of the
constellation Crater, (l, b) = (264.021◦ ± 0.011◦
, 48.253◦ ± 0.005◦
), see Ref. 55. As
well as creating the `=1 mode of the CMB sky, this motion affects all astrophysical
observations by modulating and aberrating sources across the sky, such as the CMB
temperature anisotropies. These and other effects will be discussed.
As discussed above, an accurate mapping of the tSZ signal on the sky has been
achieved with the Planck satellite. This allows us to construct a novel and independent measure of the CMB dipole because the y maps are contaminated by
temperature anisotropies stemming from the CMB dipole. This is also valuable as
a test of the quality of the y maps.
To derive the connection between the y map and the dipole we will begin by
defining some useful terms regarding the unboosted CMB sky,
I(x) ≡
2k
3
BT
3
CMB
h
2
P
c
2
x
3
e
x − 1
(2)
f(x) ≡
xex
e
x − 1
(3)
Y (x) ≡ x
e
x + 1
e
x − 1
− 4 , (4)
which are the standard Planck blackbody intensity function, the frequency dependence of CMB anisotropies, and the relative frequency dependence of the tSZ effect
or y type distortions, x being the dimensionless frequency (see Sect. 3.2). Thus, to
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 15
15
first-order the anisotropies of intensity measured by Planck can be written as
δI(nˆ)
If(x)
=
δT(nˆ)
TCMB
+ y(nˆ)Y (x), (5)
where we have included just the temperature anisotropies and the y signals here.
If we apply a boost to Eq. (5) with a dimensionless velocity β, it becomes
δI0
(ˆn
0
)
If(x)
=βµ +
δT(ˆn
0
)
TCMB
(1 + 3βµ)
+ Y (x)

y(ˆn
0
)(1 + 3βµ) + βµδT(ˆn
0
)
TCMB 
+ βµy(ˆn
0
)

Y
2
(x) − x
dY (x)
dx 
+ O(β
2
) ; (6)
here µ = cos(θ), and θ is the angle from the direction of the boost β and the line
of sight. Additionally, the aberration effect deflects the direction of the incoming
photons from ˆn → ˆn
0 where ˆn
0 = ˆn − ∇(ˆn · β). The first line has the same
frequency dependence as thermal fluctuations. The term βµ simply describes the
pure CMB dipole, as discussed previously. The second term represents the dipole
aberration and modulation of the temperature anisotropies of the CMB. This was
first measured in Ref. 56 to 5σ. Crucially for our analysis, the middle line has the
same frequency dependence as y type distortions, and so encompasses the signals
in the y-map. The final line has more obscure frequency dependencies and so will
not be discussed here. See Refs. 57,58 for further details.
The second line of Eq. (6) shows the signals in the y maps produced by Planck.
The first half is the same boost as was seen in the temperature anisotropies, however, the final term is due to the second-order expansion of the intensity about
TCMB and adds a contribution to the y maps from the temperature anisotropies.
We measured this signal in Ref. 57 to 6σ by cross-correlating the expected modulated temperature map with the y maps. We confirmed the dipole direction by
cross-correlating the temperature maps modulated in two additional perpendicular
directions. To test consistency and rule out different systematics, we used the Internal Linear Combination (ILC) in two dimensions, 2D-ILC, and MILCA y-maps, the
temperature anisotropies from both 2D-ILC and SMICA, and finally both a harmonic
space analysis and a map space analysis.
The question as to whether an intrinsic dipole could be observationally distinguished from an extrinsic dipole remains an open question. The terms discussed in
Eq. (6) are based on the assumption of a CMB blackbody spectrumi and cannot be
used to distinguish the two, as they would naturally arise whether the CMB dipole
were caused by a boost, or if there were simply a dipole in the sky with the same
magnitude and direction.
iSee instead Ref. 59 for a study exploiting the relaxation of the blackbody assumption and references to other methods.
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 16
16
4.3. Planck constraints on the primordial tensor-to-scalar ratio
Discovering the stochastic field of gravitational waves generated during the early
phases of the universe is one of the most ambitious goals of modern cosmology. Various models of inflation predict cosmological perturbations from quantum fluctuations 60–66 in terms of tensor component (gravitational waves) and scalar component
(density variations). Inflationary gravitational waves entering the horizon since recombination epoch generate a tensor component contributing to temperature (T),
polarization (E and B modes) and cross-correlation T E angular PS, C
X
` where X
stands for a given modej
, of CMB anisotropy, 67–69 in particular at large angular
scale (or at low multipoles, `
<∼ 150, where ` ∼ 180◦/θ approximately relates ` to
the angular scale θ). C
X
`
is typically represented in terms of DX
` = `(`+1)C
X
`
/(2π),
which is nearly flat at low multipoles for X = T, although a power suppression at
very large scales, first observed by the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) an
then confirmed by the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) and by the
Planck satellite, is predicted in several inflationary models possibly in connection
with universe geometry and topology.
While the E and T E modes contain both scalar and tensor signals mainly coming
from the epochs of recombination and reionization, the model does not predict
primordial scalar fluctuations in the B-mode. The detection of the primordial Bmode then constitutes a direct way to unravel tensor perturbations from the early
universe, and the efforts to measure of the ratio, r, between the amplitudes of
primordial tensor and scalar perturbations is the main scientific aim of many ongoing and future CMB projects. When CMB photons pass through gravitational
potentials produced by cosmic structures, part of the E-mode power is transformed
to B-mode power, the so-called lensing B-mode. This signal, already detected by
a number of ground-based observatories and by Planck, is particularly important
at small angular scale 70 (`
>∼ 150), but it may mask the primordial B-mode also at
intermediate angular scale and, for low r, even at large angular scale.
Assuming the spectra of scalar and tensor perturbations are described by pure
power-laws, Ps(k) = As(k/k0)
ns−1
, Pt(k) = At(k/k0)
nt
, they are fully defined by
the two amplitude parameters As, At and by the so-called (comoving wavenumber)
pivot scale k0, the definition of r = At/As being then related to the choice of k0.
Among the various choices adopted in the literature, k0 = 0.05 Mpc−1
approximately corresponds to the middle of the logarithmic range of k probed by Planck.
For historical reasons, a scale-invariant spectrum corresponds to ns = 1 or to nt = 0
for scalar or tensor perturbations, respectively.
The multipole range 2 <∼ `
<∼ 150 is the most advantageous to directly extract
r from B-mode analyses. According to theoretical predictions, the primordial DB
`
is close to the maximum at 50 <∼ `
<∼ 150, the region of the so-called recombinajFor simplicity, we use here two letters only for cross modes.
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 17
17
tion bump (i); at large scale, `
<∼ 10, DB
`
exhibits a pronounced bump generated
at late epochs by the reionization process (ii); at 10 <∼ `
<∼ 50, log(DB
`
) increases
almost linearly with log(`) (iii). Exploiting higher `’s is of particular relevance
for a very accurate treatment (delensing) of lensing B-mode. C
B
`
increases almost
linearly with r, the reionization bump features depending on r and on the details
of the reionization process, which is parametrized to first approximation by the
corresponding Thomson optical depth, τ . In general, the detection of primordial
B-modes requires exquisite experimental sensitivity and accuracy as well as very
precise treatment of the polarized foreground emissions (see, e.g., Ref. 71), particularly for low values of r, which is why a primordial B-mode tensor signal has not yet
been detected. On the other hand, recent CMB projects set significant upper limits
to r. The great sensitivity achievable by ground-based experiments on selected sky
areas has been used to strongly constrain (i), the current tightest B-mode limits
on r from these scales coming from the Background Imaging of Cosmic Extragalactic Polarization (BICEP)/Keck measurements 72 (BK15), while the Planck all-sky
survey allows to constrain (i), (ii) and (iii). In particular, Ref. 73 presents B-mode
limits on r from Planck data at `
<∼ 30.
A recent reanalysis of Planck data alone and in combination with BK15 (see
Ref. 74 for a previous joint analysis) has been performed in Ref. 75 exploiting the
whole multipole range 2 ≤ ` ≤ 150. In this study, the Planck PR4 data (see Sect.
3.1) were adopted, where the NPIPE 76 processing pipeline was used to create calibrated frequency maps in temperature and polarization from LFI and HFI data,
providing several improvements in noise and systematics levels in both frequency
and component-separated maps. Various sky masks were considered in order to
retain different sky fractions (from 30% to 70%) and to test the impact of data
treatment. In polarization, the CMB sky was separated from foregrounds applying the Commander 77 code to a model with three components, namely the CMB,
synchrotron, and thermal dust emission, starting from the PLA PR4 maps but
downgraded from Nside = 2048 to Nside = 16 and to Nside = 1024 respectively for
the analysis at 2 ≤ ` ≤ 35 and at 35 ≤ ` ≤ 150. An updated version of the LOw-`
LIkelihood on POlarised Power-spectra (LoLLiPoP) code previously employed by
the Planck Collaboration in the reionization analysis 78 was used to derive the likelihood from cross-power spectra for the CMB maps reprocessed as outlined above.
Here, cross denotes that the angular PS is extracted analyzing different sets of detectors: indeed, for these cross-power spectra the bias is zero when the noise is
uncorrelated between maps. Unbiased estimates of the angular PS were derived
using an extension of the quadratic maximum likelihood estimator and a classical
pseudo-C` estimator at 2 ≤ ` ≤ 35 and at 35 ≤ ` ≤ 150, respectively. The C`
covariance is deduced from end-to-end simulations and thus includes CMB sample
variance, statistical noise, residuals from systematics, uncertainties from foreground
subtraction, and correlations generated by masking. These uncertainties are propagated through the likelihood up to the level of cosmological parameters.
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 18
18
Applying this analysis to the B-mode alone, fixing the other cosmological parameters to the fiducial ΛCDM spectrum of Planck 2018 results, and considering
the cleanest 50% fraction of the sky, the values of r (for k0 = 0.05 Mpc−1
) retrieved from the posterior distribution analysis at 2 ≤ ` ≤ 35 (that includes the
reionization bump) or at 35 ≤ ` ≤ 150 (that includes the recombination bump) are
r0.05 = −0.014+0.108
−0.111 or r0.05 = +0.069+0.114
−0.113, respectively. The two multipole windows contribute almost equally to the overall Planck sensitivity to r. Combining
them gives r0.05 = 0.033±0.069, while setting also a positive value of r as a physical
prior implies r0.05 < 0.158 at 95% CL.
A tighter result, r0.05 = −0.031±0.046, and a stronger constraint, r0.05 < 0.069
at 95% CL, slightly improving the BK15 95% CL limit r0.05 < 0.072, is derived
applying the same method but jointly considering the three polarization modes B,
E and EB.
k
These results on r do not depend significantly on the choice of other ΛCDM
cosmological parameters. In particular, the constraints on r are unchanged when r is
retrieved together with τ : considering all polarization modes r0.05 = −0.015±0.045
and τ = 0.0577 ± 0.0056, while considering only the B-mode r0.05 = 0.025 ± 0.064
and τ is undetermined because of the noise.
The Planck temperature data are crucial to determine the other ΛCDM parameters and then, when combined with polarization data, to exhaustively verify
if the limits on r depend on the other parameters. Furthermore, although Planck
temperature data, when considered alone, are found to be about two times less sensitive than Planck polarization data in constraining r, the tensor contribution to
temperature fluctuations allows to further tight the constraints on r derived from
polarization data alone. In fact, including also Planck temperature data in the
analysis using the Planck public low-` temperature-only likelihood based on the
PR3 CMB map recovered from the Commander and the High-` Likelihood on Polarised Power-spectra (HiLLiPoP) at ` > 30, and marginalizing over the nuisance
and the other ΛCDM cosmological parameters, from the posterior distribution for r
the authors 75 derive the currently most stringent upper limit based on Planck data
alone: r0.05 < 0.056 at 95% CL.
Finally, in Ref. 75 the Planck temperature and polarization data analyzed as
summarized above have been combined with the BK15 data, assuming their mutual
independence, i.e. simply multiplying their likelihood distributions, as justified
given their so different sky coverage, obtaining r0.05 < 0.044 at 95% CL which
currently represents the most stringent upper limit.
kThe primordial EB is expected to be null in the ΛCDM model. On the other hand, special
rotation effects of the polarization field (such as birefringence) can produce some EB signal.
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 19
19
5. Future and alternative perspectives
5.1. Lorentz invariance violation and CMB polarization
The standard model of cosmology can explain the CMB radiation from the recombination epoch till today. As discussed above, it predicts the existence of some degrees
of linear polarization known as E-modes and B-modes (see also Refs. 79–81). The
linear polarization can be induced to the CMB by means of Compton scattering
of CMB photons and cosmic electrons in presence of cosmological perturbations.
However, the circular polarization for the CMB is a rare process in the standard
model of cosmology, so that observation of any level of circular polarization can be
a hint for the existence of new physics. The circular polarization for the CMB can
be generated through Faraday conversion in which linear polarized light propagates
through a medium resulting in different indexes of refraction along the two transverse axes. 82,83 Moreover, the CMB photons scattering from vector or fermionic
DM can lead to circular polarization of the CMB. 84,85 Furthermore, circular polarization for the CMB can be induced by electron-photon Compton scattering in
presence of a background field such as a magnetic field 82 or non-commutativity in
space and time. 83,86
In this study, we would like to explore the effects of Lorentz invariance violation
(LIV) as a new background in the generation of circular polarization (see Ref. 87
for details). To do that we assume the CMB photon and cosmic electron scatter
while the particle Lorentz symmetry is violated. To evaluate the LIV effect in
the Compton scattering, we focus on an effective field theory approach known as
standard model extension (SME). The minimal version of the SME contains every
gauge invariant and observer-covariant operator, made by all the standard model
(SM) fields which violate Lorentz invariance specified with new couplings. 88 In
the SME, LIV is considered in a coordinate that the speed of light is constant
c in all frames. The kinetic term in electron sector of electromagnetic quantum
electrodynamics (QED) Lagrangian is modified with c
µν tensor as 89
L
LIV
QED =
1
2
iψ¯(γ
ν + c
µνγµ)
←→D µψ − ψm¯
eψ , (7)
where Dµ represents the covariant derivative with u
←→D µv ≡ uDµv −vDµu , ψ is the
fermion field, γµ indicates the Dirac gamma matrices, and the mass of electron is
me. We assume c
µν to be symmetric and traceless tensor. The c
µν tensor depends
on the frame and it is estimated in the standard reference frame, i.e. Sun-centered,
celestial equatorial frame (SCCEF). 90 All the available bounds on LIV parameters
are given in SCCEF frame to be comparable with each other. Therefore, we also
use correlation between components of laboratory frame and SCCEF given in Ref.
90 to transfer the result to SCCEF frame.
The polarization of the scattered CMB photon from cosmic electron in presence
of LIV is characterized by four Stokes parameters: 79 [I, Q, U, V ]. I indicates the
overall radiation intensity, Q and U represent linear polarization and V is circular
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 20
20
polarization of the CMB radiation satisfying the inequality I
2 ≥ Q2 + U
2 + V
2
.
The time evolution of Stokes parameters, defining the CMB polarization, can be
expressed through the quantum Boltzmann equation, schematically as 79
df
dt = C[f] , (8)
where the left-hand side involves time derivative of Stokes parameters which includes
the gravitational effects and space time structure; besides, all possible interactions
appear at the right-hand side of Boltzmann equation.
After expanding the intensity and polarization of the CMB radiation in terms
of multipole moments in spin-weighted basis, the Boltzmann equations regarding to
electron-photon Compton scattering in presence of LIV by considering only scalar
perturbation in the metric, are obtained as
d
dη ∆
(S)
I + iKµ∆
(S)
I + 4[ψ˙ − iKµϕ] = C
I
eγ
d
dη ∆
±(S)
P + iKµ∆
±(S)
P = C
±
eγ − iκ±
LIV ∆
(S)
V
d
dη ∆
(S)
V + iKµ∆
(S)
V = C
V
eγ +
i
2
h
κ
+
LIV ∆
−(S)
P + κ
−
LIV ∆
+(S)
P
i
; (9)
here η is the conformal time, ψ and φ are the scalar perturbation corresponding
to the potential of Newton and the spatial curvature perturbation, µ is the scalar
product of the wave vector K and the CMB photon propagating direction, ∆±(S)
P =
Q(S)±iU(S)
is a linear combination of linear polarizations, C
I
eγ, C
±
eγ and C
V
eγ indicate
the involvement of the SM Compton scattering in ∆±(S)
P
and ∆(S)
V
parameters,
respectively. In presence of LIV, the terms κLIV and κ
±
LIV in Eq. (9) are given by
κLIV = −a(η)
3
4
σT
α
m2
e
k0
n¯e
me
, κ±
LIV = κLIV c{αβ}(ρ
{αβ}
Q ± iρ{αβ}
U
) ; (10)
they define the Compton scattering contribution, k0 being the momentum of the
CMB photon. In general, the CMB polarization at the direction nˆ and at the present
time η0 is derived by integrating Eq. (9) along the line of sight and summing over
all Fourier modes K. The circular polarization due to LIV Compton scattering can
finally be estimated in terms of linear polarization as follows
∆
(S)
V
(K, µ, η0) ≈
1
2
Z η0
0
dη η˙eγ e
ixµ−ηeγ h
3µ∆
(S)
V 1 + 2i ρ{αβ}
Q c{αβ}
κLIV
η˙eγ
∆
(S)
P
+ 2
κ
−
LIVκ
+
LIV
η˙
2
eγ
∆
(S)
V
i
, (11)
where
∆
(S)
P
(K, µ, η) = Z η
0
dη η˙eγ e
ixµ−ηeγ h
3
4
(1 − µ
2
)Π(K, η)
i
, (12)
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 21
21
ρ
{αβ}
Q = −
h

1
· cˆ · 
2 +
X
f=e,p
mf v
2
b
2k0
(ˆv · 
2
vˆ · cˆ · 
1 + ˆv · 
1
vˆ · cˆ · 
2
) (13)
−
vb
2
(ˆv · 
2ˆk · cˆ · 
1 + ˆv · 
1ˆk · cˆ · 
2
)
i
,
Π = ∆(S)
T2 + ∆(S)
P 2 + ∆(S)
P 0
and ˙ηeγ = a(η)neσT and ηeγ =
R η0
η
η˙eγ(η)dη are the
differential optical depth and total optical depth. For a detail calculation of Eqs.
(9)-(13) see Ref. 87. The angular PS, C
V
`
, arisen from CMB-cosmic electron forward
scattering in presence of LIV is obtained as
C
V
` ≈
1
2` + 1 Z
d
3KPv(K) ×
P
m



Z
dΩY
∗
l`m Z η0
0
dη η˙eγ e
ixµ−ηeγ 2i ρ{αβ}
Q c{αβ}
κLIV
η˙eγ
∆
(S)
P
|
2
; (14)
here Pv(K) indicates the velocity PS which can be estimated as a function of primordial scalar spectrum Pv(K, τ ) ∼ P
(S)
φ
(K, τ ). Therefore, we can estimate the
C
V
`
in terms of linearly polarized angular PS as follows:
C
V
` ≈ (˜κ
avg
LIV)
2C
P
`
, (15)
with
κ˜LIV = c{αβ} ρ
{αβ}
Q
κLIV
τ˙eγ
, κ˜
avg
LIV =
1
zlss Z zlss
0
dz κ˜LIV(z) ' 10−3
, (16)
where ˜κ
avg
LIV is average of ˜κLIV(z) over redshift from last scattering surface, zlss '
1100, up to today, z = 0. Based on recent experimental astrophysics bounds on
different components of c
αβ tensor, 91 we assume all component of c
αβ tensor at the
order of 10−15. Considering the experimental value for the CMB linearly polarized
angular PS of the order of 92 C
P
` ≡ 0.1µK2
for ` < 250, we can estimate the V -mode
angular PS arisen from Compton scattering in presence of LIV as follows:
C
V
` ≈ 0.8 nK2
 c
αβ
10−15 2
. (17)
The current experimental bound on the circular polarization coming from the
Cosmology Large Angular Scale Surveyor (CLASS) experiment with the 40 GHz
polarimeter ranging from 0.4µK2
to 13.5µK2
for 1 ≤ ` ≤ 120. We expect that by
improving the sensitivity of experiments in future, the constraint obtained in Eq.
(17) would be comparable to experimental bounds.
5.2. New gravitational degrees of freedom and the DM problem
The nature of DM is the deepest problem of modern cosmology. Assuming GR, DM
appears to be a necessary ingredient in theoretical models constructed for explaining
astrophysical and cosmological observations on ∼ kpc scales or larger. This essentially boils down to a mismatch between the observed dynamics of visible matter
and its gravitational influence. Many theories of what is DM have been proposed. 93
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 22
22
The DM microphysical nature, however, is not crucial to explain many cosmological observations. This leads to a simple description so that the DM dynamics are
effectively governed by the collisionless Boltzmann equation, coupled to gravity.
The less explored alternative is that DM is not the cause behind all these observed phenomena, but rather that GR (and also Newtonian gravity) breaks down
at ultra-low curvatures and gravitational accelerations and a new description of
gravity is necessary. Changing the law of gravity, however, is not as arbitrary as
it may seem. 94 Lovelock’s theorem95 tells us that GR is the unique 4-dimensional
theory based on a local and diffeomorphism-invariant action where the metric is
the only dynamical degree of freedom. If a non-GR gravitational theory is then
assumed to explain the DM phenomenon, it is inevitable that one or more of these
assumptions must be broken, and this generically leads to new dynamical degrees
of freedom, that is, new dynamical fields.
Milgrom proposed 96–98 that DM is only an apparent phenomenon and that one
can instead fit galactic rotation curves via a modification of the inertia/dynamics
of baryons or of the gravitational law, when accelerations become smaller than
a0 ∼ 1.2 × 10−10 m/s2
. Modifying the gravitational law was further explored by
Bekenstein & Milgrom99 who proposed that when the gradients of the potential Φ
are smaller than a0, non-relativistic gravity is effectively governed by
∇ · 
|∇Φ|
a0
∇Φ

= 4πGNρ , (18)
where GN is the Newtonian gravitational constant, and ρ the matter density. These
type of models are referred to as Modified Newtonian Dynamics (MOND).
MOND has enjoyed success in fitting galactic rotation curves and reproducing
the baryonic Tully-Fisher relation, while on GC scales it is found that either a0
must be larger by a factor of 4÷5 or that some DM is still needed at GC cores;
see Ref. 100 for a review. As MOND is inherently non-relativistic, it is difficult to
test in cosmological settings, since systems such as the CMB require a relativistic
treatment. Relativistic theories that yield MOND behavior have been proposed,
the most well-known being the Tensor-Vector-Scalar (TeVeS) theory, 101,102 making
clear predictions regarding gravitational lensing and cosmology. In cases where the
CMB and matter power spectra (MPS) have been computed, no theory has been
shown to fit all of the cosmological data while preserving MOND phenomenology
in galaxies. TeVeS in particular can be compatible with the MPS of large scale
structure 103,104 but fails to fit the CMB. Moreover, it leads to a tensor mode gravitational wave (GW) speed different than the speed of light, 105 in contradiction with
the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO)/Virgo observations of GW along with an electromagnetic counterpart.
The non-relativistic equation (18) can only be an effective description, due to
Lovelock’s theorem. To make it into a fully fledged relativistic theory, one can introduce additional fields. Building on TeVeS and later developments, 105,106 Skordis
& Zlosnik 107 proposed a simple relativistic theory which in addition to the metric
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 23
23
gµν has a scalar field φ and unit time-like vector field Aµ. Perturbing these fields on
a Minkowski background, results in perturbations of φ and Aµ which mix with the
metric perturbation via gauge transformations, i.e. the metric potentials mix with
the perturbations of φ and Aµ. Thus, φ and Aµ are gravitational fields and not
DM fields, because due to this mixing it is impossible to distinguish observationally
which of the three is the cause behind the “DM phenomenon”, in analogy to the
electric/magnetic field mixing resulting in the electromagnetic field.
The theory contains a free function F(Y, Q) of two arguments: Q = Aµ∇µφ
and Y = q
µν∇µφ∇νφ where qµν = gµν + AµAν is the 3-metric orthogonal to Aµ.
It must obey certain conditions in order for the theory to serve its purpose and
to be observationally viable. To recover MOND on galactic scales, it is necessary
that the reduced function J (Y) ≡ F(Y, Q0)/(2 − KB) where Q0 is a non-zero
constant, has the limit J → Y3/2/a0 when Y ∼ |∇ϕ|
2
is small. Imposing that
and considering virialized systems in the weak-field approximation, leads to linear
equations involving the metric potential Φ and a scalar perturbation ϕ, sourced
by the (baryonic) matter density. These contain an additional term which is not
present in MOND, but looks like a mass term for the potential, µ
2Φ, where here
µ
2 = 2K2Q2
0/(2− KB). It is determined by the other parameters of the theory: Q0,
appearing in as part of the free function, KB, related to the coupling strength of
the vector field and taking values in the range 0 < KB < 2, and K2, related to the
coupling strength of the scalar field. In addition, the resulting equations depend
on Milgrom’s constant a0. Thus in the quasistatic weak-field situation, at least two
parameter combinations are important: a0 and µ, although, depending on how the
GR limit is attained, there may be further parameters as part of the free function.
Due to the presence of the mass term µ, the theory departs from MOND behaviour
at ultra-low accelerations determined by µ.
Consider now setups involving the relativistic nature of the theory. The form
of the action of the theory ensures that the right amount of gravitational lensing is
ensured whenever Φ correctly determines the dynamics and the tensor mode GW
speed is equal to the speed of light in all situations. Meanwhile, on FriedmannLemaˆıtre-Robertson-Walker (FLRW) φ = φ¯(t) while Aµ aligns trivially with the
time direction so that Y → 0 and Q → ¯˙φ and the action reduces to that of shiftsymmetric K-essence 108 and the low-energy limit of the ghost-condensate theory. 109
Defining then the reduced function K(Q) ≡ −F(0, Q)/2, we require that K ≈
K2 (Q − Q0)
2 + . . ., with non-zero Q0 (same constants as what appear above), the
energy density of φ scales precisely as a
−3
, a = 1/(1 + z) being here the cosmic
scale factor, i.e. like pressureless matter, plus small corrections. The equation of
state and speed of sound of φ also scale as a
−3 and depend on the constants K2
and Q0 of the action. In the late universe limit these tend to zero so that the
linear perturbations of φ and Aµ can be re-casted by linear transformations into a
density contrast δ and velocity divergence θ of pressureless matter. In this limit,
the field equations of φ and Aµ and their contribution to the Einstein equations,
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 24
24
become identical to pressureless-dust equations, i.e. as for CDM. This ensures that
the CMB and MPS spectra calculated within this theory, become parametrically
close to those from ΛCDM, leading to excellent fits to the CMB angular PS from
Planck and the MPS obtained from galaxy clustering.
To summarize, the theory is not a MOND extrapolation to cosmology. Rather,
it recovers MOND in quasistatic situations on galactic scales, and it tends to ΛCDM
behaviour on cosmological scales. It depends on a free function, which is, however,
constrained so that these two limits are attained. Doing that, the theory depends on
a minimum of 4 parameters, KB, Q0, K2 and a0, while additional parameters could
be part of the free function and be related to the GR limit or the early universe.
5.3. Exploiting the magnification bias with high-z sub-mm galaxies
Magnification bias is due to gravitational lensing and consists in the apparent excess
in the number of high-z sources (the lenses sources) close to the position of low-z
galaxies (the lenses). In fact, the gravitational lensing deflects the light rays of
high-z sources causing the stretching of the apparent sky area in the region affected
by the lensing. This also causes a boost in the flux density of the high-z sources,
making them more likely to be detected above a given instrument flux density
limit (see, e.g., Ref. 110). The magnification bias can be measured through the
cross-correlation between the low and high-z objects. Given two source samples
with non-overlapping redshift distributions, the excess signal when computing their
cross-correlation with respect to the random case is due to the magnification bias.
Being such signal related to lensing and thus to cosmological distances and the
galaxy halo characteristics, it can be used to constrain cosmological parameters.
In order to get the best cross-correlation measurements, at the moment the
optimal choice is to use as high-z sources (background samples) the high-z sub-mm
galaxies (SMGs) first of all because of their steep number counts, shown with recent
observations by the Herschel Space Observatory 111 and the South Pole Telescope 112
(SPT) strengthening their magnification. Moreover, the SMGs are faint in the
optical which means that they do not get confused with the foreground lens sample,
being such sample invisible at sub-mm wavelength. Lastly, the SMGs redshift are
usually above z > 1 so that their selection as background sample ensures no overlap
with the foreground objects. In fact, due to their extreme magnification bias, Dunne
et al. (Ref. 113) make a serendipitous direct observation of high-z SMGs. While
performing a study of gas tracers with Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter
Array (ALMA) observation of galaxies targeting a statistically complete sample of
twelve galaxies selected at 250 µm with z = 0.35, magnified SMGs appears around
the position of half of them.
As shown in Refs. 114,115, these advantages make the SMGs the perfect background sample for tracing the (baryonic and DM) mass density profiles of galaxies
and GCs and their time-evolution and for constraining the free parameters of a
halo occupation distribution (HOD) model. In the adopted HOD model 116 all ha-
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 25
25
los above a mass Mmin host a central galaxy and those above a mass M1 host
satellites (galaxies in the halo) whose number is a power-law, (M/M1)
α, of the halo
mass M. In particular, the results in Ref. 114 suggests that the lenses are massive
galaxies or GCs, with a minimum mass of 1013M. Later on, Bonavera et al. (Ref.
115) study with the magnification bias the mass properties of a sample of quasars
whose position signpost the lens at 0.2 < z < 1.0 obtaining a Mmin = 1013.6
+0.9
−0.4M.
This again suggests that the lensing is actually produced by halos of the size of GCs
placed close to the quasar positions.
Moreover, some of the main cosmological parameters can be also estimated
using the magnification bias, as in Ref. 117. They use the cross-correlation data
measured between a foreground sample of Galaxy And Mass Assembly (GAMA)
galaxies with spectroscopic redshifts in the range 0.2 < z < 0.8 and a background
sample of Herschel Astrophysical Terahertz Large Area Survey (H-ATLAS) galaxies
with photometric redshifts z > 1.2 to constrain the HOD astrophysical parameters
(Mmin, M1, and α) and some of the cosmological ones (ΩM, σ8, and H0). These
parameters are estimated through a Markov chain Monte Carlo analysis. They
obtain a lower limit at 95% CL on ΩM > 0.24, a slight trend towards H0 > 70
values and a tentative peak around 0.75 with an upper limit at 95% CL of σ8 < 1.
Such results are summarized in the ΩM − σ8 plane in Fig. 7 (left panel).
Furthermore, magnification bias trough cross-correlation measurements can be
used to constrain the halo mass function. In particular, Ref. 118 successfully tests
such possibility according to two common parametrizations, the Sheth & Tormen 119
and the Tinker et al. 120 fits.
They find general agreement with traditional values for the involved parameters,
with a slight difference in the Sheth & Tormen fit for intermediate and high masses,
where the results suggest a hint at a somewhat higher number of halos. Given
the large number of studies that can be performed with magnification bias through
Fig. 7. Left: ΩM and σ8 contour plot for the non-tomographic case in Ref. 117 (dot-dashed
blue line) and the tomographic runs in Ref. 122 for ΛCDM (in yellow), ω0CDM (in green) and
ω0ωaCDM (in purple) models. Central: ω0 and ωa contour plot for the ω0ωaCDM model.
In both panels, the contours of the 2-dimensional posterior distributions are set to 0.393 and
0.865. Right: ω0 results for the ω0CDM (green) and ω0ωaCDM (purple) models compared
with those by DES (blue), Planck 1 (base w wa plikHM TT lowl lowE BAO, salmon), Planck 2
(base w plikHM TT lowl lowE, brown), Supernovae (red), X-ray measurements (yellow). Adapted
from Bonavera et al., A&A, in press, DOI 10.1051/0004-6361/202141521, 2021 (Ref. 122), reproduced with permission from Astronomy & Astrophysics, © ESO.
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 26
26
cross-correlation data, a systematic analysis of possible bias that might affect the
estimation is being carried out. In particular, Gonz´alez-Nuevo et al. (Ref. 121) take
into account different biases at cosmological scales in the source samples to carefully measure unbiased cross-correlation functions. More precisely, their background
sample consists of H-ATLAS galaxies with z > 1.2 whereas they use two independent foreground samples with 0.2 < z < 0.8: GAMA galaxies with spectroscopic
redshifts and Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) galaxies with photometric redshifts.
These independent samples allowed them to perform a pseudo-tomographic study
that yields to constrain ΩM = 0.50+0.14
−0.20 and σ8 = 0.75+0.07
−0.10. Such analysis also
suggests that a tomographic approach might improve the results.
Driven by the conclusions mentioned above, adopting the unbiased sample by
Ref. 121, Bonavera et al. 122 use magnification bias in tomography to jointly constrain the HOD astrophysical parameters in each selected redshift bin together with
the ΩM, σ8, and H0 cosmological ones in the ΛCDM scenario and for DE models in
the ω0CDM and ω0ωaCDM frameworks characterized by the ω0 and ωa parameters
defining the DE barotropic index as ω(a) = ω0 + ωa(1 − a). The foreground sample
has been divided into four redshift bins (0.1–0.2, 0.2–0.3, 0.3–0.5 and 0.5–0.8) and
the sample of H-ATLAS galaxies has photometric redshifts z > 1.2. As for the HOD
parameters, Mmin shows a trend towards higher values at higher z confirming the
findings in Ref. 114. For the ΛCDM model, they obtain a maximum posterior value
[68% CL] of ΩM = 0.26 [0.17,0.41] and of σ8 = 0.87 [0.75,1] (implying S8 ' 0.81,
in good agreement with the result in Sect. 4.1), being H0 not yet constrained.
For the ω0CDM model, they find similar results on ΩM and σ8 and a maximum
posterior value [68% CL] of ω0 = −1 [−1.56, −0.47]. For the ω0ωaCDM model,
ω0 = −1.09 [−1.72, −0.66] and ωa = −0.19 [−1.88, 1.48]. Fig. 7 shows the results
in the ΩM − σ8 plane for the ΛCDM, ω0CDM and ω0ωaCDM models (left panel)
and in the ω0 − ωa plane (central panel). The results on ω0 for the ω0CDM and
ω0ωaCDM cases are shown in Fig. 7 (right panel), together with a comparison with
other results from literature. Moreover, the tomographic analysis presented in Ref.
122 confirms that magnification bias results do not show the degeneracy found with
cosmic shear measurements and that, related to DE, do show a trend of higher ω0
values for lower H0 values (see Ref. 123 for details).
In conclusion, SMGs turn out to be a perfect background sample for magnification bias analyses, useful in astrophysical studies and as a further independent cosmological probe for ΛCDM and beyond ΛCDM models and this can be implemented
adopting different foreground samples. Up to now ΛCDM compatible results have
been found with tomographic and non-tomographic approaches and serendipitous
direct observation of magnified SMGs have been performed with ALMA.
Acknowledgments
CB acknowledges partial support from the INAF PRIN SKA/CTA project
FORECaST. LB acknowledges the PGC 2018 project PGC2018-101948-B-I00
November 24, 2021 1:38 ws-procs961x669 WSPC Proceedings - 9.61in x 6.69in CM1˙main page 27
27
(MICINN/FEDER). TRC acknowledges support of the Department of Atomic Energy, Government of India, under project no. 12-R&D-TFR-5.02-0700. CS acknowledges support from the European Research Council under the European
Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) / ERC Grant Agreement n. 617656 “Theories and Models of the Dark Sector: Dark Matter, Dark
Energy and Gravity” and from the European Structural and Investment Funds and
the Czech Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports (MSMT) (Project CoGraDS -
CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15003/0000437). RS acknowledges the support of the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. HT acknowledges support
from the ERC-2015-AdG 695561 (ByoPiC project). AW acknowledges funding from
the South African Research Chairs Initiative of the Department of Science and Technology and the National Research Foundation of South Africa. Some of the results
in this paper have been derived using the HEALPix 34 package. The use of the PLA
is acknowledged. It is a pleasure to thank N. Aghanim, D. Contreras, M. M. Cueli,
M. Douspis, B. Gaensler, J. Gonzalez-Nuevo, R. Mohammadi, D. Scott, S. S. Xue,
the MISTRAL Collaboration and the Planck Collaboration for long-standing collaborations on the various topics discussed in this paper.
