Learning to Superoptimize Real-world Programs
Alex Shypula1
, Pengcheng Yin1
, Jeremy Lacomis2
,
Claire Le Goues2
, Edward Schwartz3
, Graham Neubig1
1Carnegie Mellon University Language Technologies Institute
2Carnegie Mellon University Institute for Software Research
3Carnegie Mellon University Software Engineering Institute
Abstract
Program optimization is the process of modifying software
to execute more efficiently. Because finding the optimal program is generally undecidable, modern compilers usually resort to expert-written heuristic optimizations. In contrast, superoptimizers attempt to find the optimal program by employing significantly more expensive search and constraint solving techniques. Generally, these methods do not scale well
to programs in real development scenarios, and as a result
superoptimization has largely been confined to small-scale,
domain-specific, and/or synthetic program benchmarks. In
this paper, we propose a framework to learn to superoptimize real-world programs by using neural sequence-tosequence models. We introduce the Big Assembly benchmark, a dataset consisting of over 25K real-world functions
mined from open-source projects in x86-64 assembly, which
enables experimentation on large-scale optimization of realworld programs. We propose an approach, Self Imitation
Learning for Optimization (SILO) that is easy to implement
and outperforms a standard policy gradient learning approach
on our Big Assembly benchmark. Our method, SILO, superoptimizes programs an expected 6.2% of our test set when
compared with the gcc version 10.3 compiler’s aggressive
optimization level -O3. We also report that SILO’s rate of
superoptimization on our test set is over five times that of a
standard policy gradient approach and a model pre-trained on
compiler optimization demonstration.
1 Introduction
Program optimization is a classical problem in computer science that has existed for over 50 years (McKeeman 1965;
Allen and Cocke 1971), and most years, entire tracks at compiler conferences are dedicated to it (Pouchet and Jimborean
2020). The standard tool for generating efficient programs
is an optimizing compiler that not only converts humanwritten programs into executable machine code, but also
performs a number of semantics-preserving code transformations to increase speed, reduce energy consumption, or
improve memory footprint (Aho et al. 2006). Most optimizing compilers use semantics-preserving heuristic-based
optimizations. These optimizing transformations generally
need to be written by experts for an individual compiler, and
are applied to an intermediate representation of the code produced over the course of transforming high-level code into
executable machine code. In an effort to automatically create optimized programs that surpass human-defined heuristics, the research community has pioneered automated optimization methods, or “superoptimizers,” based on bruteforce search (Massalin 1987), heuristic search (Schkufza,
Sharma, and Aiken 2013), and satisfiability modulo theories (SMT) solvers (Sasnauskas et al. 2017). These superoptimizers may outperform compiler-based optimizations, but
are difficult to employ in practice.
Recent work by the machine learning community has
demonstrated the ability of deep learning models to reason
about and even generate code to assist developers for a variety of tasks (Allamanis et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2021). Despite this, research in machine learning-based program optimization remains underexplored. Existing work focused on
the highly constrained problem of expression simplification
in a simple domain-specific language (DSL), and has only
been tested on synthetic examples (Shi et al. 2020). While
this is an important stepping stone demonstrating the feasibility of machine learning-based program optimization, it
also avoids many of the interesting but more complex optimization opportunities that emerge with the combination of
control flow, memory reasoning, and sheer scale, as seen in
real world software.
In this work, we demonstrate the ability of deep neural networks to optimize real-world programs on Github.
For this, we introduce Big Assembly, a dataset consisting
of over 25K functions in x86-64 assembly mined from online open-source projects from Github, which enables experimentation on large-scale optimization of real-world programs. We also propose an easy to implement algorithm Self
Imitation Learning for Optimization (SILO) that progressively improves its superoptimization ability with training.
Our results indicate that it superoptimizes an expected 6.2%
of our test set beyond gcc -O3, over five times the rate of a
model pre-trained on the outputs of an optimizing compiler
as well as a model fine-tuned with policy gradient methods.
Instead of focusing on customized search method unique to
a language’s implementation and semantics, our methodology relies on a dataset of demonstrations for pre-training as
well as a test case generator, a sandbox for executing programs, and a method for verifying program equivalence. We
find examples of our model applying compiler optimizaiton
techniques such as register allocation, redundant instruction
arXiv:2109.13498v1 [cs.LG] 28 Sep 2021
elimination, and instruction combination to superoptimize
programs.
2 Problem Formulation
The superoptimization task is, when given a specification
for a program S and a reference program Fref (which meets
the specification), to generate an optimized program Fo that
runs more efficiently and is equivalent to the reference program Fref . In this paper we focus on program optimization
at the assembly level, so S, Fref , and Fo are all programs
written in X86-64 assembly code. S is a program with no
optimizations applied at all and its purpose is to demonstrate
desired program semantics. Fref is an assembly program
produced by the optimizing compiler gcc at its aggressive
-O3 optimization level.
We assume that programs are deterministic, and as a result model each program as a function that maps inputs to
outputs. We will use I to represent the hardware state prior
to executing the program (i.e., input) and O to represent
the hardware state after executing the program (i.e., output).
Specifically, our goal is to learn a model fθ : S 7→ Fo
such that a model-generated (optimized) program Fˆ
o attains lower cost, and ideally minimal cost, under a cost
function C(·) evaluated on a suite of K input-output test
cases {IO}
K
k=1: for example energy consumption or runtime. This model-generated program must meet the specification, which is determined by a verification function
V(·) ∈ {0, 1}. More details about C and V are located in
Section 5. The learned model’s objective is then to produce
rewrites that meet the condition:
C

Fˆ
o; {IOk}
k
k=1
< C

Fref ; {IOk}
K
k=1
s.t. V( Fˆ
o, S) = 0
(1)
In order to train our model on some of the optimizations
that are present in modern compilers in a supervised manner
and to improve it by learning from experience a dataset is
necessary. Our training set Do therefore consists of N tuples
of (1) an I/O test suite {IOk}
K
k=1, (2) a compiled and unoptimized program specification S, (3) and a compiled and
aggressively optimized program as Fref :
Do =

{IOi
k}k=1...K, S
i
, F
i
ref ,
 
i=1...N
(2)
In Section 4 we explain our methodology for learning to
superoptimize programs; before this, however, we first introduce our benchmark dataset for optimizing real-world programs in Section 3.
3 Big Assembly Benchmark
There is no standard benchmark for evaluating superoptimization research. Some researchers have evaluated on
randomly-generated programs in a simplified domain specific language (Chen and Tian 2019; Shi et al. 2020),
while others have tested on small and hand-picked programs (Joshi, Nelson, and Randall 2002; Gulwani et al.
Table 1: A list of program optimization benchmarks from
machine learning and programming languages / systems
works. The three criteria for evaluating listed are the number
of individual examples in the benchmark (Sz.), are the programs written by humans (H.), are the programs found “in
the wild” (i.e. in open source projects) (R.W.), and does the
benchmark contain either branching or control flow (CTL.)
DATASET SZ H. R.W. CTL.
SHI ET AL. (2020) 12,000 ✗ ✗ ✗
GULWANI ET AL. (2011) 25 ✓ ✗ ✗
CHURCHILL ET AL. (2017) 13 ✓ ✓ ✓
OURS 25,141 ✓ ✓ ✓
2011; Churchill et al. 2017). While these datasets are sufficient for demonstrating methodological capabilities, they
do not necessarily reflect the properties of real code, and
thus do not predict their performance relative to modern optimizing compilers on real-world programs. Lastly, smallscale benchmarks are insufficient for data-hungry modern
deep learning.
In our work, we introduce the Big Assembly benchmark,
which contains 25,141 C functions that we compiled using
gcc, both with (-O3) and without (-O0) aggressive optimizations. We started by collecting 1.61 million functions
from open source projects on Github that were written in
C. Of these 1.61M, we were able to mine testcases for a
dataset of over 100,000 functions. We performed two stages
of sanity checks and analysis to compute a conservative approximation of the live out registers. The first involved using SMT solvers to find equivalence between the gcc -O0
function used as the specification S and the gcc -O3 function used as Fref and filtered out trivial programs such as
those equivaent to return 0, this reduced our dataset to
77,813 functions. We then performed a similar pass, but instead using the test case suite {IO}
K
k=1 reducing our total
dataset to 25,141 functions (19,819 train, 2,193 dev, 3129
test). For testcases, we automatically generated random testcases, which are part of the dataset. These testcases can be
used to test for equivalent behavior and to estimate the performance of the code. We used the STOKE toolkit1 with
additional modifications for this purpose.
Table 1 compares the basic properties of our dataset to
those from existing work; beyond its size, our dataset is
salient in that it is representative of functions from real world
code. It also contains examples with more complex operations such as SIMD instructions, branching, and loops. Additional details on how the dataset was collected are available in the supplementary materials section.
4 Learning Program Optimizations
In this section we elaborate on our approach that learns to
optimize real-world programs. We first describe the underlying neural model before introducing the learning algorithm.
1
https://github.com/StanfordPL/stoke
Neural Program Optimizer
Our program optimization model fθ is a neural sequenceto-sequence network, where the input specification (unoptimized program) and output (optimized program) are represented as sequences of tokens. Specifically, fθ is parameterized with a standard Transformer-based encoder-decoder
model (Vaswani et al. 2017).
Learning Algorithms
For learning to optimize, we develop a two-stage learning approach. First, in a pre-training stage, to capture
commonly-used optimization heuristics adopted by existing
optimizing compilers, we use supervised learning to train the
model on the mined corpus Do of gcc-optimized programs
(E.q. 2) described in Section 3. Next, to discover more efficient optimization strategies, we investigate fine-tuning using policy-gradient methods and a proposed iterative learning approach, SILO.
Policy Gradient Approach As in Eq. (1), our goal is to
synthesize a correct program Fˆ
o verified by V and outperforms a reference program Fref on the cost function C. An
intuitive choice is to use policy gradient methods to learn a
policy that directly minimizes our cost function C and produces correct programs under V in expectation. Specifically,
we express this dual objective via the Lagrangian relaxation:
J(Fˆ
o) = C

Fˆ
o; {IOk}
k
k=1
+ λ V( Fˆ
o, S). (3)
A commonly used policy gradient approach is REINFORCE with baseline (Williams 1992). Based on our minimization objective, we can express the loss using the following equation, where b(S) is a baseline value for the given
specification and p(at|a<t; S) is the model-given probability for generating a token at time step t for sequence Fˆ
o. In a
traditional reinforcement learning context we would seek to
perform gradient ascent on the following term; because we
are trying to minimize the objective, we perform gradient
descent instead.
L =
X
T
t=1
log p(at|a<t; S)
J(Fˆ
o) − b(S)
(4)
Self Imitation Learning for Optimization (SILO) Algorithm 1 illustrates our SILO learning approach. It consists of two steps, an exploration step (lines 4-11) where
the model seeks to discover alternative optimizations that
are more efficient than the compiler generated targets used
in pre-training, and a learning step (lines 12-13), where the
model parameters are updated using newly discovered optimized programs. First, in the exploration step, an exploration batch Bex is sampled from the dataset D initialized
with program specifications (in our case, unoptimized assembly programs) S
i
and their compiler-optimized outputs
F
i
ref . For each input specification S
i
in Bex, we sample a
model-predicted optimization Fˆi
o
, and execute Fˆi
o on the I/O
test suite {IO}
K
k=1 to compute the cost function C. If any
of the new samples are both functionally equivalent by our
Algorithm 1: SILO for Program Optimization
1: Initialize model f parameters θ from pre-trained model
2: Initialize dataset of program function pairs and test
cases:
D = Do =
n
{IOi}
K
k=1, S
i
, F
i
ref ,
 o
i=1...N
3: while budget not exhausted do
4: Sample a batch Bex from Do
5: for
{IOi}
K
k=1, S
i
, F
i
ref ,

in Bex do
6: sample Fˆ
i
o ∼ fθ(Si
)
7: calculate C(Fˆ
i
o
), and V(Fˆ
i
o
, S
i
)
8: if V(Fˆ
i
o
, S
i
) = 0 and C(Fˆ
i
o
) < C(F
i
ref ) then
9: Replace Fi
ref with sample Fˆ
i
o
in D
10: end if
11: end for
12: Sample a batch Btr from D
13: Update θ via supervised learning on Btr from D
14: end while
verification function V and also achieve a lower cost under
C compared to the compiler-optimized targets in the original dataset, the compiler-optimized target in the dataset is
then replaced with the model’s newly-discovered optimal
rewrite. After the exploration step is taken, in the learning
step, a separate training batch Btr is sampled for maximumlikelihood training from the dataset which may now contain
model-optimized targets.
Self-imitation learning (Oh et al. 2018) is an off-policy reinforcement learning algorithm intended to help agents solve
challenging exploration problems by learning from good
past actions. Intuitively, besides the ordinary on-policy reinforcement learning using the latest model-predicted actions,
the model is also trained on historical states s and actions a
that achieve high rewards R using a cross-entropy loss:
Lsil = − log p(a|s) max
(R − Vθ(s)), 0

(5)
where each sample ha, si is weighted by how much better
the off-policy return was compared to the learned baseline
Vθ(s). Our algorithm, SILO, has a few differences with standard self-imitation learning. First, for sequences that outperform Fref we omit a learned value function and train on the
entire sequence using cross-entropy loss, as opposed to individual actions. Additionally, we do not interpolate our loss
with an on-policy reinforcement learning algorithm. Rather,
we avoid the policy gradient altogether, and instead train
only on the best sequence found so far in our dataset, be it
the compiler-optimized outputs Fref or a sequence discovered that outperforms it Fo. This is also broadly related to
the “hard” EM algorithm that uses the currently best modelpredicted results as optimization targets (Kearns, Mansour,
and Ng 1998).
Actor-Learner with Evaluation Server
Architecture
One hurdle to performing program optimization at scale is
that the the time required to evaluate C and V is costly, li
Actor
Actor
Actor
Learner Parameters
Experiences
Program
Rewrites
Assess I/O Correctness
Approximate Performance
Verify with SMT Solvers
Feedback
Evaluation
Server
Figure 1: An overview of our actor-learner setup. It features
interaction between a centralized learner module, numerous
asynchronously-operating actors, as well as a server for evaluating program rewrites.
ing model throughput of learning examples. To alleviate this
bottleneck, we utilize an actor-learner set up (Liang et al.
2018; Espeholt et al. 2018). Before the training process begins, multiple actor threads inheriting the parameters of the
parent learner are created. For every iteration, each of the
actor threads independently samples a batch of program rewrites from the distribution of the inherited model.
After sampling a batch of re-writes, an attempt is made
the evaluate the rewrites by sending them to an evaluation
server. Inside the evaluation server, the programs are assembled and tested for correctness and performance to calculate
C and V; more details on evaluation are located in Section 5.
The actor then sends the samples with their related cost and
correctness information to the learner module for learning.
Then, the actor attempts to synchronize its parameters by
inheriting a new copy, if available, from the learner module.
Fig. 1 contains an overall diagram for our entire system.
Model Configuration and Training
Our neural optimizer fθ uses a 3-layer transformer encoderdecoder with embedding dimension of 512 with 8 attentionheads. We utilize the Adam optimizer (Kingma and
Ba 2014) with the inverse square root schedule from
Vaswani et al. (2017). We pre-trained the model for 88K
steps and subsequently performed our fine-tuning algorithms for an additional 5K steps. We additionally use
SentencePiece2
to pre-process the assembly with bytepair encoding (Sennrich, Haddow, and Birch 2015). Additional details on training hyperparameters and data preprocessing are located in our supplementary materials section.
5 Evaluation
A primary concern in constructing the verification function
V in Eq. (1) is the undecidability of program equivalence
for programs with control flow such as loops. If using testcases for equivalence V as well as the cost function C chal2
https://github.com/google/sentencepiece
lenges also lie in utilizing a testcase suite {IO}
K
k=1 for either
benchmarking a program’s performance or coming up with
an approximate estimate for performance.
Measuring Program Correctness
A key claim of this work is that our superoptimizer outputs
correct programs — that is, programs that are more efficient,
but still semantically equivalent, to the input programs. Program equivalence is undecidable in the general case, motivating a complementary set of mechanisms for verifying
output program correctness. In our experiments, we confirm output program correctness for our verification function
V in two ways. First, we run synthesized programs on the
provided test cases. Second, we formally verify correctness
using two solver based verifiers: the bounded SMT solver
based verifier from the standard STOKE toolkit, and an additional verifier available from the artifacts in the program
verification work in Churchill et al. (2019). These program
verifiers are based on the state-of-the-art Z3 SMT solver
(De Moura and Bjørner 2008); SMT (“Satisfiability Modulo
Theories”) solvers decide the satisfiability of boolean formulas with respect to a set of underlying theories (such as
the theory of integer arithmetic).
We use both test cases and the two verifiers for several
reasons. High coverage test suites are informative in terms
of program correctness, but intrinsically incomplete. Meanwhile, verifiers do not always scale, especially to programs
with arbitrary numbers of loop iterations to ensure termination. As is standard we configured a maximum bound of b
(set to 4) loop iterations, and the process does not timeout
by taking over T seconds (set to 150). Verification is thus
also incomplete past those bounds, and limited by the correctness of the verifiers’ underlying models.
Indeed, we manually observed cases where our finetuning methods exploited either gaps in test suite coverage,
or bugs in the verifiers’ models of x86-64 semantics.3 Motivated by this, we use both testcases and the two verifiers
for additional robustness. While this would intuitively help
mitigate spuriousness during evaluation, it could still remain
an issue when evaluating optimization of open-domain programs. As we later explain in Section 7, we also resort to human verification to get reliable results when reporting model
performance on test sets.
Measuring Program Performance
We follow previous work on superoptimization of x86 assembly and primarily calculate the cost function C (E.q. 1)
as a static heuristic approximation of expected CPU-clock
cycles. We compute the sum of both performance cost
functions from Schkufza, Sharma, and Aiken (2013) and
Churchill et al. (2017). The former is a sum of all expected
latencies for all instructions in the assembly function (denoted as Call), while the latter computes expected latencies
only using executed instructions (Cexe) from the randomly
generated test suite {IO}
K
k=1. Cexe is a better approximation, especially for functions that contain loop constructs,
3We have since reached out to the authors of (Churchill et al.
2019) regarding issues we have found
while Call may additionally penalize redundant instructions
that are not executed. Expected latencies were calculated by
the authors of the STOKE toolkit for the Intel Haswell architecture by benchmarking and measuring instructions for
servers.
Testing
In our experiments, we test our methods by taking our final
model, and generate 10 model-optimized candidates through
beam search, and then calculate C and V for each. We then
report results based on the best result of all 10 candidate
programs.
6 Application to Hacker’s Delight
We apply our methods to the 25 functions chosen from the
HACKER’S DELIGHT benchmark (Warren 2002), first used
in Gulwani et al. (2011) for program synthesis and later in
Schkufza, Sharma, and Aiken (2013) for x86-64 program
superoptimization. In the latter work, authors express they
were able to either match or outperform gcc -O3 when
provided programs compiled with LLVM -O0. The superoptimization benchmark consists of bit-vector manipulation
challenges such as “take the absolute value of x.” Before
evaluating on our large scale Big Assembly dataset in Section 7, we perform controlled experiments on HACKER’S
DELIGHT allowing for interpretable optimizations and consistency with prior work.
Results We examined the results of REINFORCE and
SILO with respect to two quantities: (1) the number of programs where a superoptimized version was found at least
once during the training process, and (2) the number of programs for which a superoptimized version was found within
the top-10 hypotheses generated by beam search from the
last model at the end of training. Regarding the former metric, REINFORCE and SILO respectively found 3 and 2
superoptimized programs during the training. For the latter metric, the final models produced by REINFORCE and
SILO output 1 and 2 superoptimized programs respectively.
This can be explained by the fact that policy gradient methods have a wider breadth for exploration during the training
process compared to SILO, but also are less stable in their
final solutions.
Interpretation of Superoptimizations We include examples of the two programs found by both algorithms that illustrate interesting patterns of program superoptimization.
The first example in Fig. 2 comes from the challenge of
creating a mask to identify the trailing zeros in a program.
In this example, our model combines the first two instructions into one using the x86 “load effective address” instruction, which is named after the ability to compute an offset
from a memory address, but highly useful for simplifying
some simple arithmetic. It is an example of a peephole optimization, an optimization applied to a small window of instructions with a scope metaphorical of peering through a
door’s peephole. This one optimization is commonly used
in compilers, and was likely learned from demonstration. It
may be surprising that the compiler did not apply such a
.trailing_zeros_mask:
movl %edi, %eax
subl $0x1, %edi
notl %eax
andl %edi, %eax
retq
(a) -O3 code
.trailing_zeros_maski:
leal -0x1(%edi), %eax
notl %eax
andl %edi, %eax
retq
(b) Model-optimized code
Figure 2: An example of the trailing zeros mask from
HACKER’S DELIGHT demonstrating a commonly used instruction combine optimization for x86 assembly.
.absolute_value:
movl %edi, %eax
sarl $0x1f, %eax
xorl %eax, %edi
subl %eax, %edi
movl %edi, %eax
retq
(a) -O3 code
.absolute_value:
movl %edi, %eax
sarl $0x1f, %edi
xorl %edi, %eax
subl %edi, %eax
retq
(b) Model-optimized code
Figure 3: An example of the HACKER’S DELIGHT absolute
value function, demonstrating superior register allocation.
commonly-used optimization on the fast -O3 setting; however, it is known that compilers may not always choose the
best optimizations to apply (Leather and Cummins 2020).
The second example in Fig. 3 comes from the task of taking the absolute value of the input integer, and demonstrates
more sophisticated behavior in performing efficient procedural optimizations. In the gcc -O3 optimized assembly,
the program performs an auxiliary computation in the %eax
(return) register and majority of the computation in the %edi
argument register, and finally moving it into the %eax register. A more clever solution lies in eliminating the last move
instruction by switching the auxiliary computation into the
%edi register and then performing majority of the computation directly in the %eax register used for returning the result. This is an example of more-efficient register allocation
which is the process of assigning hardware register locations, of which there are a small number, to the variables and
computations performed by the program. Improving register allocation can result in the program copying data fewer
times, which can improve performance. For a human, realizing such an optimization would require ingenuity to realize
that the final instruction may be redundant and a competent
procedural understanding of assembly to realize and re-write
with the computation flipped. A plausible explanation for
this result is that by pre-training our model with gcc -O0
unoptimized code as the original reference program and optimized gcc -O3 code as the optimized target program, the
model may have learned a degree of competence in register allocation via demonstration, thereby placing probability
mass on an alternative, yet more efficient implementation.
7 Application to Big Assembly
In applying our methods to the Big Assembly dataset, we
followed the same general experimental setup as HACKER’S
DELIGHT; however, we evaluated our results on held-out
sets. As mentioned in Section 5, we observed cases where
our models exploited bugs in the verifiers’ models of x86-64
semantics, thus we also incorporated manual human evaluation into our reporting methodology for the benchmark.
For both learning methods, we chose the best model of the
ones checkpointed every 1K steps during fine-tuning. We did
this by choosing the model with the highest proportion of
programs that were superoptimized on a randomly-sampled
subset of 329 functions from the validation set according
to our cost function C, correct according to our verification
methodology V, and correct again by manual human evaluation.
Using the chosen model, we then evaluated performance
on the test set. We manually evaluated 25% of our test set
to find what proportion of reported superoptimizations were
actually correct. In Table 2 we report (1) the proportion of
the entire test set that was superoptimzied according to our
automatic methods discussed in Section 5 as well as (2) our
estimate of the actual proportion that would manually verify
correct. For the latter (2), we use our measured proportion
of reported superoptimizations that manually verified correct from the 25% subset along with (1) the proportion of
reported superoptimizations for the entire test set to generate our expected number of programs that verified correct.
Results We witness that our proposed algorithm SILO far
outperformed REINFORCE with baseline on this task: on
the test set, SILO superoptimized an expected 6.2% of programs and REINFORCE with baseline superoptimized an
expected 0.9%. We also note that despite the fact we used
two separate SMT based verifiers to prove correctness, our
SILO approach was capable of finding and learning generalizable exploits in a manner that REINFORCE did not.
In our study of manually verifying assembly programs,
we witnessed that across all earlier and later stages of training, the REINFORCE model consistently superoptimized
the same 5 to 6 programs in the validation set; in other
words, it did not seem to apply superoptimization patterns
to any new programs or learn any new superoptimization
patterns. In contrast, the SILO model consistently increased
the number of programs it superoptimized in the held-out
set over time: it seemed to broaden its capacity to apply
patterns to new programs and simultaneously learn different strategies to superoptimize or even exploit the verifier;
this trend is reflected in the Fig. 4 plot. We hypothesize that
the reward space for program superoptimizations is highly
sparse: while training, we saw that less than 1 in every 1,000
samples the REINFORCE model sampled were program superoptimizations. We believe, without a method to re-learn
from past experience, the on-policy REINFORCE algorithm
struggles to find the signal in the noise, and instead is faced
with optimizing a challenging objective of synthesizing syntactically and semantically correct programs. This is a nontrivial objective, because making a small error in program
syntax or semantics can have a dramatic effect on the reward
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Percent Verified
Step Number
SMT (SILO)
SMT and Human (SILO)
SMT (RL)
SMT and Human (RL)
Figure 4: A plot reflecting the proportion of the validation
set sub-sample population (329 programs) superoptimized
every 1000 steps of training.
Table 2: Test set results on the Big Assembly benchmark
comparing the pre-trained model, SILO and REINFORCE
with baseline. The first column (SMT Ver.) reports the proportion of programs that beat the gcc -O3 baseline and verify using our automated evaluation methods in Section 5.
The second column (SMT + Human Ver.) presents our expected proportion of programs that would additionally pass
a human evaluation step, based on the 25% sample of the
test set we manually verified.
Model SMT Ver. SMT + Human Ver.
PRE-TRAIN 1.2% 1.0%
SILO 8.3% 6.2%
REINFORCE 0.9% 0.9%
the model gets.
Interpretation of Superoptimizations In our study of the
assembly that outperformed gcc -O3 we saw two main patterns emerge: pushing operations out to branches and removal of redundant instructions; Fig. 5 contains an example
of both. In this one function, the first instruction, movl $0x1,
%eax, is overwritten by later instructions and is only useful
if the first jump of the program is taken. Given this fact, it
is more efficient under our cost model to push out the computation after the first jump is taken to prevent it from being
executed redundantly.
The second example of an optimization lies in removing
the redundant line highlighted in red xorl %eax, %eax which
zeros out the lower 32 bits of the return register %rax. This
instruction is redundant because the same instruction is executed two instructions earlier, and in between, there is no
operation with side-effects on the %rax register. As a result,
it is safe to remove the second operation. We do note that
it is possible that on modern pipelines architectures, such
optimizations may or may not speed up the runtime of a
program depending on how instruction level parallelism and
branch prediction is handled on hardware: this is a challenge
.prstree_empty:
movl $0x1, %eax
testq %rdi, %rdi
je .L1
xorl %eax, %eax
cmpl $0xb, (%rdi)
je .L1
xorl %eax, %eax
cmpq $0x0, 0x10(%rdi)
sete %al
.L1:
retq
(a) -O3 code
.prstree_empty:
testq %rdi, %rdi
je .L1
xorl %eax, %eax
cmpl $0xb, (%rdi)
je .L2
cmpq $0x0, 0x10(%rdi)
sete %al
.L1:
movl $0x1, %eax
.L2:
retq
(b) Model-optimized code
Figure 5: An example from the Big Assembly benchmark of
simultaneously removing a redundant instruction and pushing operations to branches.
in count-based models of CPU runtime that are common in
the program superoptimization works we are aware of. Being said, we have seen examples where our model created
superoptimized assembly removing redundant instructions
in straight line code as well as nop that were executed, and
not just used as padding.
8 Related Work
Program Optimization The general undecidability of
program equivalence means that there may always be room
for improvement in optimizing programs (Rice 1953). This
is especially true as hardware options and performance goals
become more diverse: what transformations are best for a
scenario may vary greatly on performance objectives such
as such as energy consumption or runtime or other factors.
There are classes of functions that are amenable to exhaustive search, where the optimal sequence of calculations is found (Massalin 1987). However, these are limited
to very small sequences of machine instructions. State-ofthe-art methods for superoptimization either rely on searchbased procedures (Schkufza, Sharma, and Aiken 2013), or
constraint-based methods (Sasnauskas et al. 2017). However, these methods have difficulty scaling to larger problems, and as a result, typically do not meet the performance
requirements of real development scenarios at compile time.
Machine-Learning-Based Program Optimization Perhaps the closest work to ours is Shi et al. (2020) which
attempted to learn symbolic expression simplification on a
dataset of synthetically generated symbolic expressions in
Halide by re-writing sub-trees of the parsed expression with
reinforcement learning. The domain differs from ours; however, as the domain specific language contains simple expressions and randomly generated programs may contain redundancies not seen in assembly optimized by a compiler
like gcc.
Another work that addressed automatic program optimization is Bunel et al. (2016). Unlike the Halide-based experiments, the work used reinforcement learning to learn a
proposal distribution for stochastic search used in Schkufza,
Sharma, and Aiken (2013). While the learned proposal
distribution showed improvements over the baseline, the
method ultimately still used stochastic search, except with
new hyper-parameters. Unlike our work, the model is unable to fully control program transformations end-to-end as
it provides no learned priors on where in a program to apply
program transformations.
A recent body of work centers on learning and searching
for more efficient schedules for tensor computations (Chen
et al. 2018; Adams et al. 2019). These works address realworld problems of performance in image processing and
deep learning performance and often utilize machine learning to achieve these goals. However, these works differ in
that the search space is defined over how a program is run on
hardware, a schedule. This search space is decoupled from
the underlying algorithms themselves. Whereas in optimizing x86-64 assembly, both the algorithm and how it is computed on hardware are in the domain of our search space.
9 Conclusion
In our work, we explored the task of program superoptimization with neural sequence models. Towards this goal,
we introduced the Big Assembly benchmark consisting of
1.61 million programs mined from open source projects on
Github for pre-training along with and a subset of over 25K
functions with testcases that can additionally be passed off to
the SMT based verifiers in the STOKE toolkit. We proposed
SILO, a learning approach with a two step process (1) an
exploration step to search for program superoptimizations,
and (2) a learning step on the best sequences found during training. Our experiments on the Big Assembly dataset
demonstate that SILO is able to outperform REINFORCE
with baseline. We believe that REINFORCE struggles, because program superoptimziation is a highly-challenging exploration task with a very sparse reward space. By incorporating supervision on superoptimized sequences, SILO is
able to learn optimizations more effectively from its exploration.
Recently, large neural sequence models have been proposed as an effective method for program synthesis in highlevel programming languages such as python from natural
language specifications (Yin and Neubig 2017; Chen et al.
2021); however, to our knowledge, relatively little work
has been done to refine these models to go beyond simply synthesizing correct programs, and additionally optimize for important metrics such as performance or readability. Given the increased availability of natural language to
code datasets with testcases, tuning neural sequence models
to go beyond program synthesis and optimize for additional
metrics is a promising direction for future work.
10 Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Bogdan Vasilescu, Vincent Hellendoorn, Chris Cummins, Berkeley Churchill, and Qibin Chen
for their feedback, thoughts, and ideas during the drafting of
this work. This work was supported in part by the National
Science Foundation under grants 1815287 and 1910067
References
Adams, A.; Ma, K.; Anderson, L.; Baghdadi, R.; Li, T.-M.;
Gharbi, M.; Steiner, B.; Johnson, S.; Fatahalian, K.; Durand, F.; et al. 2019. Learning to optimize halide with tree
search and random programs. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 38(4): 1–12.
Aho, A. V.; Lam, M. S.; Sethi, R.; and Ullman, J. D. 2006.
Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools. Pearson Education, Inc., 2 edition.
Allamanis, M.; Barr, E. T.; Devanbu, P.; and Sutton, C. 2018.
A survey of machine learning for big code and naturalness.
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 51(4): 1–37.
Allen, F. E.; and Cocke, J. 1971. A Catalogue of Optimizing
Transformations. Technical report, IBM Thomas J. Watson
Research Center.
Bunel, R.; Desmaison, A.; Kumar, M. P.; Torr, P. H.; and
Kohli, P. 2016. Learning to superoptimize programs. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1611.01787.
Chen, M.; Tworek, J.; Jun, H.; Yuan, Q.; Ponde, H.; Kaplan,
J.; Edwards, H.; Burda, Y.; Joseph, N.; Brockman, G.; et al.
2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374.
Chen, T.; Zheng, L.; Yan, E.; Jiang, Z.; Moreau, T.; Ceze, L.;
Guestrin, C.; and Krishnamurthy, A. 2018. Learning to optimize tensor programs. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 3389–3400.
Chen, X.; and Tian, Y. 2019. Learning to perform local
rewriting for combinatorial optimization. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 6281–6292.
Churchill, B.; Padon, O.; Sharma, R.; and Aiken, A. 2019.
Semantic program alignment for equivalence checking. In
Proceedings of the 40th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, 1027–
1040.
Churchill, B.; Sharma, R.; Bastien, J.; and Aiken, A. 2017.
Sound loop superoptimization for google native client. ACM
SIGPLAN Notices, 52(4): 313–326.
De Moura, L.; and Bjørner, N. 2008. Z3: An efficient
SMT solver. In International conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems, 337–
340. Springer.
Espeholt, L.; Soyer, H.; Munos, R.; Simonyan, K.; Mnih,
V.; Ward, T.; Doron, Y.; Firoiu, V.; Harley, T.; Dunning, I.;
et al. 2018. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.01561.
Gulwani, S.; Jha, S.; Tiwari, A.; and Venkatesan, R. 2011.
Synthesis of loop-free programs. ACM SIGPLAN Notices,
46(6): 62–73.
Joshi, R.; Nelson, G.; and Randall, K. 2002. Denali: A goaldirected superoptimizer. ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 37(5):
304–314.
Kearns, M.; Mansour, Y.; and Ng, A. Y. 1998. An
information-theoretic analysis of hard and soft assignment
methods for clustering. In Learning in graphical models,
495–520. Springer.
Kingma, D. P.; and Ba, J. 2014. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980.
Leather, H.; and Cummins, C. 2020. Machine learning in
compilers: Past, present and future. In 2020 Forum for Specification and Design Languages (FDL), 1–8. IEEE.
Liang, C.; Norouzi, M.; Berant, J.; Le, Q. V.; and Lao, N.
2018. Memory augmented policy optimization for program
synthesis and semantic parsing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 9994–10006.
Massalin, H. 1987. Superoptimizer: a look at the smallest program. ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News,
15(5): 122–126.
McKeeman, W. M. 1965. Peephole optimization. Communications of the ACM, 8(7): 443–444.
Oh, J.; Guo, Y.; Singh, S.; and Lee, H. 2018. Self-imitation
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.05635.
Pouchet, L.; and Jimborean, A., eds. 2020. CC 2020: Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Compiler
Construction. Association for Computing Machinery.
Rice, H. G. 1953. Classes of recursively enumerable sets
and their decision problems. Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society.
Sasnauskas, R.; Chen, Y.; Collingbourne, P.; Ketema, J.;
Taneja, J.; and Regehr, J. 2017. Souper: A Synthesizing Superoptimizer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.04422.
Schkufza, E.; Sharma, R.; and Aiken, A. 2013. Stochastic
superoptimization. ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture
News, 41(1): 305–316.
Sennrich, R.; Haddow, B.; and Birch, A. 2015. Neural machine translation of rare words with subword units. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1508.07909.
Shi, H.; Zhang, Y.; Chen, X.; Tian, Y.; and Zhao, J. 2020.
Deep Symbolic Superoptimization Without Human Knowledge. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
Vaswani, A.; Shazeer, N.; Parmar, N.; Uszkoreit, J.; Jones,
L.; Gomez, A. N.; Kaiser, Ł.; and Polosukhin, I. 2017. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, 5998–6008.
Warren, H. S. 2002. Hacker’s Delight.
Williams, R. J. 1992. Simple statistical gradient-following
algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. Machine learning, 8(3): 229–256.
Yin, P.; and Neubig, G. 2017. A Syntactic Neural Model for
General-Purpose Code Generation. In Proceedings of the
55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 440–450. Vancouver,
Canada: Association for Computational Linguistics.
A SMT based Verifier Exploits Found
In our manual evaluation stage, we witnessed the primary
pattern of exploiting the SMT solver based verifier was that
of branch deleation. We present a concrete example of one
such exploit paired with the verifier’s output in Fig. 6. In
the first subfigure we demonstrate the pattern exploiting the
verifier from the original STOKE toolkit4
, and in the second
subfigure we show the output when running on the verifier
included in the artifacts from a follow up work on program
verification.5
In this example, a comparison is done between
the hex constant 0x2e and the value located at the address
in register %rdi; if the two are equal, the program jumps to
location .L1 executing a sequence of code to place a value
in the %eax register conditional on multiple tests. If the constant is not equal to the value in memory, the jump is not
taken, and the program returns with a 0 in the %eax register:
this is because the very first line of the program xorl %eax,
%eax zeros out the the %eax register. Deletion of the branch
following .L1 is incorrect. We believe that the verifiers struggle with forms of branching and jump statements very often
found in real-world programs. This is despite the fact that
previous works the verifiers were used for included loops
(which depend on jump statements) or branching. We found
that when we removed the jump and location statement from
the spurious rewrite, thereby preserving function semantics
and eliminating all branching, both verifiers correctly identified that the two programs were not equivalent.
B Additional Information on the Big
Assembly Benchmark
Data Collection Our Big Assembly benchmark was
mined from open source projects implemented in the C
programming language on Github. Our programs were disassembled using GNU Binutils’ objdump into x86-64 assembly, and split into individual functions. We performed
the process twice on the same set of source code, so that
we could create a parallel corpus of functions. We split
our dataset into train, development, and test sets based at
the level of entire individual github projects. We deduplicated by removing any overlapping binaries between the
datasets. We also deduplicated at the individual function
level by removing string matches after removing function
names from assembly functions. Lastly, we removed programs pairs from the dataset if either the source or target
program had length greater than 512 after byte-pair encoding tokenization.
Setting Live out and Filter Spurious Examples As mentioned in Section 3 for our each function in our dataset, we
were required to determine the live out set, the portion of the
CPU state required for determining the equivalence between
programs. We also determine heap out, which is a boolean
flag that determines whether or not we should also check the
heap for equivalence as well. We perform this sanity check
by determining what parts of the CPU state are equivalent
4
https://github.com/StanfordPL/stoke
5
https://github.com/bchurchill/pldi19-equivalence-checker
Target Rewrite
.smtp_is_end.s: .smtp_is_end.s:
xorl %eax, %eax xorl %eax, %eax
cmpb $0x2e, (%rdi) cmpb $0x2e, (%rdi)
je .L1 je .L1
retq .L1:
.L1: retq
movzbl 0x1(%rdi), %edx
cmpb $0xd, %dl
sete %al
cmpb $0xa, %dl
sete %dl
orl %edx, %eax
movzbl %al, %eax
retq
Equivalent: yes
(a) Output from the original STOKE bounded verifier
Target Rewrite
.smtp_is_end.s: .smtp_is_end.s:
xorl %eax, %eax xorl %eax, %eax
cmpb $0x2e, (%rdi) cmpb $0x2e, (%rdi)
je .L1 je .L1
retq .L1:
.L1: retq
movzbl 0x1(%rdi), %edx
cmpb $0xd, %dl
sete %al
cmpb $0xa, %dl
sete %dl
orl %edx, %eax
movzbl %al, %eax
retq
[bv] Checking pair: 0 1 2 4; 0 1 2 3
Couldn’t take short-circuit option without memory.
[bv] Paths 0 1 2 4 / 0 1 2 3
verified: true
[bv] Checking pair: 0 1 2 4; 0 1 2 3
Couldn’t take short-circuit option without memory.
[bv] Paths 0 1 2 4 / 0 1 2 3
verified: true
[bv] Checking pair: 0 1 3 4; 0 1 2 3
We’ve finished early without modeling memory!
[bv] Paths 0 1 3 4 / 0 1 2 3
verified: true
[bv] Checking pair: 0 1 3 4; 0 1 2 3
We’ve finished early without modeling memory!
[bv] Paths 0 1 3 4 / 0 1 2 3
verified: true
Equivalent: yes
(b) Output from verifier in the artifacts from (Churchill et al. 2019).
Figure 6: An example of the common exploit where the right
hand side deletes the branch of code following .L1. If the
third and fourth lines (je .L1; .L1:) are removed, then the
verifier actually returns correctly.
between the gcc -O0 function and the gcc -O3. Pseudocode for how live out is described in Algorithm 2, in this
algorithm we refer to the gcc -O0 function as Fu.
In line 1, the algorithm begins by initializing live out with
all possible CPU registers. In lines 2-5, until either the computation budget is exhausted or the live out set reaches a
fixed point, we iteratively execute the function get live out
which incrementally determines the candidate live out set. It
works by either executing the testcase suite or runs the SMT
solver based verifier, analyzing any difference in the resulting CPU state, pruning any part of the CPU state that differs,
and then returning the subset of the CPU state that may be
equivalent between Fuand Fref . This may need to be run iteratively, because after pruning live out with respect to one
counter example, it is possible another counterexample may
still trigger a difference in other parts of the CPU state. For
most of the general purpose CPU registers, we also perform
this pruning at the sub-register level, allowing the register
size for equivalence to be pruned down to the lower 32, 16,
and 8 bits. If the computation budget is exhausted, the program returns early, and the program is discarded from the
dataset.
After determining live out, in lines 6-10 an additional
check is done to see if both programs are equivalent when
checking the heap. If they are, heap out is set to true, and
this information is recorded to be used for the fine-tuning
phases. Lastly in lines 12-15, we perform a final sanity check
to ensure that none of our programs are equivalent to a set
of spurious programs such as a null program, a return 0,
and a return 1. If a program is equivalent to one of these
highly simplistic programs, it is discarded from our dataset.
Algorithm 2: Set Live Out and Filter Examples
1: Initialize: live out = ALL LIVE OUT
2: repeat
3: old live out = live out
4: live out = get live out(Fu, Fref , live out)
5: until old live out 6= live out or budget exhausted
6: if diff (Fu, Fref , live out, heap out = True) then
7: heap out = False
8: else
9: heap out = True
10: end if
11: is spurious = False
12: for Fspur in SPURIOUS do
13: if ¬diff (Fspur , Fref , live out, heap out) then
14: is spurious = True
15: end if
16: end for
Data Preprocessing for Training We perform additional
processing on our programs that we feed into the model to
remove noise; we do this for the gcc -O0 function S as well
as the gcc -O3 functions used for pre-training Fref . x86-64
assembly often uses GOTO-like instructions to jump to different parts of a binary: this is one way that control flow
is implemented. The jump targets are often marked as offsets in the binary itself; however, at the individual function
level these may be canonicalized with ordinal locations (i.e.
.L1, .L2, and so on). This fully preserves function semantics
while removing noise from the prediction task.
C Hyperparameters and Settings
In this section we report the hyperparameters used for finetuning our models.
General Hyperparameters We found that our SILO algorithm did not need hyperparameter fine-tuning; whereas,
our REINFORCE with baseline experiments were more brittle. We witnessed that without a lower learning rate and
a carefully tuned learning rate schedule, our REINFORCE
experiments would very often diverge before the full finetuning budget was exhausted. For all fine-tuning, we used
2,000 steps warmup. For the SILO experiments, we utilized
a constant factor of .50 applied to the “noam scheduler”
from Vaswani et al. (2017). For the REINFORCE models,
we used a factor of .01 for the Big Assembly dataset and a
factor of .0025 for the HACKER’S DELIGHT dataset.
REINFORCE Hyperparameters For our baseline in
Eq. (3), we used a mean of the objective function for the previous 256 samples for each unique program. After subtracting the mean from the return, we then subsequently normalized by the standard deviation of the objective function of
the previous 256 samples. For the lagrangian multiplier λ in
Eq. (3), we used a penalty of 50,000. Additionally, we follow
Schkufza, Sharma, and Aiken (2013) in adding an additional
penalty of 100 for every bit in the CPU state that differed between the reference implementations and the rewrite output
such that functions with similar semantics would be penalized less than those with dramatically different semantics.
To prevent our objective function from growing too great,
we also clipped the maximum cost so it would not exceed
100,000. As is typical in many policy gradient algorithms,
we also included an entropy bonus β to encourage additional
exploration: we used a constant entropy bonus of β = 0.01
for both our HACKER’S DELIGHT and Big Assembly experiments.
