Galaxy surveys have been instrumental in enhancingour understanding of the Universe [1– 4]. Beyond thetraditional analyses, it is useful to think about how toextract additional information from the large number ofgalaxies that will be discovered in the following years[5 , 6].One of the suggestions has been using measurementsof galaxy angular momenta, that can extend our under-standing of physics at megaparsec scales [7– 9]. Such mea-surements can aid with reconstruction of the initial con-ditions (ICs) in the Universe [7, 8] and help to constrainneutrino masses [10], primordial gravitational waves [ 11],primordial non-Gaussianity [12] and chirality violationsin the early Universe [9]. Better knowledge of initial mat-ter distribution in the local volume would also aid studiesof galaxy formation.In our current understanding, the dark matter haloesacquire angular momenta from the inhomogeneous tidalfield that torques the non-spherical protohalo early on[13– 17]. At late times, interactions with the nearby largescale structure notably complicate the picture [16– 37].Despite these late time effects, it turns out that thedirection of the halo angular momentum retains a sig-nificant amount of the initial information [9]. Naturally,we can not directly measure angular momenta of darkmatter haloes. Fortunately, spins*1 of galaxies tend to becorrelated with spins of their dark matter haloes [38, 39],and so there is a potential to use measurements of galaxyspins to probe the initial conditions in the local Universe.It seems that the amplitude of the dark matter halo'sangular momentum also retains information about the *1 As a shorthand, here and in what follows we use “spin” to specif- ically only refer to the direction of the angular momentum of ahalo/galaxy, ignoring its amplitude. initial conditions [40] (but see [ 16 , 39]). However, in thiswork we only consider the angular momenta directions,especially given the experimental cost involved in deter-mining the amplitudes of galaxy angular momenta.The prospect that measurements of galaxy spins mighthelp with the reconstruction of the initial conditions inthe Universe requires an observational verification. Wemade a first step in this direction in [41], where we founda correlation between the galaxy spins of a sample ofabout 15000 galaxies and initial conditions reconstructedfrom positions of a larger sample of galaxies [42]. Unfor-tunately, due to the limited number of galaxies we couldonly confirm this correlation with a ∼ 3σ confidence. Toachieve this result, we combined a set of galaxies forwhich integral field spectroscopy data is available witha set of spiral galaxies with known senses of rotation oftheir spiral arms.At least in principle we have access to a significantlylarger dataset of galaxy spins. Assuming that each spiralgalaxy forms a thin disk with its spin pointing perpen-dicularly to the plane of the disk, we can utilize shapemeasurements of spiral galaxies to determine their spinsup to a so-called four-fold degeneracy (see below) [7].Shape measurements of spiral galaxies, as a proxy fortheir spins, are thus potentially useable as an additionalhandle on the initial conditions of the Universe. In thispaper we investigate to what extent such a propositionis viable by studying correlations between galaxy spincomponents determined solely from galaxy shapes andobservables derived from the initial density field as mea-sured using a traditional reconstruction technique. Incontrast with [41], we trade a somewhat lower signal pergalaxy (due to the four-fold degeneracy) for a larger num-ber of galaxies. Unlike the previous studies such as [43],we study correlations of galaxy shapes with observablesderived from initial, not late time, density field.This paper is organized as follows: In § II we de-scribe how to determine galaxy spins from the galaxyshape measurements and discuss the four-fold degener- arXiv:2111.12578v1 [astro-ph.CO] 24 Nov 2021
Page 2
2acy. Then we explain how we quantify correlations be-tween galaxy spins and the initial conditions and list theobservables built from the initial conditions we considerin this work. In § III we introduce the data used and in§ IV we present our results. We conclude with discussionin § V.We use indices i, j, k, l to denote components of vectorsand tensors in three dimensions. II. THEORY In this section we introduce the thin disk approxi-mation that we use to connect measurements of galaxyshapes and their angular momenta. Then we describehow we quantify correlations between galaxy spins andvarious observables built from the initial conditions, be-fore listing all such observables considered in this work. A. Spins from shapes Measuring the full 3D vector of galaxy angular momen-tum requires integral field spectroscopy, which is experi-mentally costly and can at the present only be obtainedfor several thousands of galaxies [44 , 45]. Using an ap-proximation in which spiral galaxies are considered to bethin disks allows us to use images of spiral galaxies toinfer information about their angular momenta [23 , 43].Currently, tens of thousands of such images are available.In this thin-disk approximation, matter is assumed tobe circling around the galaxy center in the plane of thedisk, implying that the galaxy angular momentum vectoris perpendicular to the plane of the galaxy. This planecan be, up to a two-fold degeneracy, determined from theposition angle α and axis ratio R of the galaxy image.Additional two-fold degeneracy then arises because fromα and R alone we are unable to determine whether thegalaxy spin points towards or away from the observer.
alaxy shapes obtained by fitting the exponential profileto the galaxy images, instead of the de Vaucouleurs one.The detection significance of L R ˆTL R , the observable wedetect with the highest significance, drops by almost afull standard deviation and for the three smoothing scalesends up in the 4.9 – 5.7 σ range. The other correlationsare only changed within ±0.2σ.We take 5.7σ as a conservative estimate of the maxi-mal discovered correlation. Because of the look-elsewhereeffect, it is not possible to claim a 5.7σ detection of corre-lation between the galaxy shapes and the initial conditiongiven we investigate 42 different variables (listed in Ta-ble I). The overall detection significance can be boundedfrom below by calculating the probability of finding 5.7σor larger effect among 42 independent observations.
Correlations between the variables increase the detec-tion significance, so to get a better estimate we take thecovariance of the various observables V into account. Weestimate this covariance from the random reshuffling ofR and α we used earlier to calculate σ 2 V. We then sim- ulate random draws from a Gaussian distribution withthis covariance. We find that draws where any variabledeviates by more than 5.7σ from its expected value oc-cur with probability 2 × 10 −7 , which translates into ourfinal estimate of the significance ∼ 5.2σ. Had we startedwith the maximal local significance 6.6σ we see when theresults are based on fits of the de Vaucouleurs profile,we would obtain a proportionally larger global detectionsignificance.Finally, we looked at the correlations in four bins ineither redshift (Fig. 2) or halo mass (as estimated byELUCID, Fig. 3) for the smoothing length r = 4 h −1 Mpc,where we see the most significant detection. We see mildtrends in some of the observables, but given the largenumber of 
invstigated data points it is expected to seedependencies just by pure chance and we do not pursuethis issue further. We thus mainly use these splits asan additional systematic check. Given all redshift andhalo mass bins lead to generally consistent results, wehave checked that our results are not dominated by anyoutlier. These splits also serve as a rough check on thesize of our error bars.
In this work we studied correlations between direc-tions of galaxy angular momenta determined from galaxyshapes (axis ratios and position angles) and various ob-servables built from the initial density and gravitationalpotential.We found a statistically significant correlation betweenthe radial component of the galaxy spin L R and the tidalfield in the vicinity of the protohalo (specifically the unittraceless shear tensor ˆT). Physically this correspond togalaxies being preferentially oriented face on (edge ​​on)in places where the major (minor) axis of the tidal fieldaligns with the line of sight. 
We explain above that the tidal-torque theory predictsvanishing 〈L R ˆTL R〉. As this theory is based on the firstorder perturbation theory described by the Zeldovich ap-proximation, detection reported in this paper suggestswe are detecting a non-perturbative effect. This com-plements earlier reports pointing out limitations of thetidal-torque theory (eg [16 , 51]).When smoothing with r = 4 h −1 Mpc, we also find cor-relation with the unit traceless inertia tensor Î, with localsignificance of 4.4σ. Interestingly, at about 2.8σ signif-icance we detect correlation with the spin galaxy proxyL IC . This is comparable to what was found in [41] with asmaller number of galaxies, though with access to addi-tional information that allowed us to break the four-folddegeneracy.In general, excess signals are compatible when using ei-ther L R or L T , galaxy spin vectors parallel and tangentialto the line of sight. The error bars are always larger forcorrelations including L T , which is understandable giventhat the position angle α acts as an additional source ofuncertainty.The initial conditions as provided by ELUCID are in-creasingly uncertain on smaller and smaller scales. Itis unclear whether our detection is limited by this uncer-tainty, or by other factors, such as the late time evolutionof the galaxy spins.Overall, we have shown that galaxy shapes of spiralgalaxies, explicitly the axis ratios of their images, pro-vide additional information about the initial conditions.It is thus possible that including the galaxy shape mea-surements in the reconstruction efforts such as describedin [48 , 52– 56] might improve the process of reconstruc-tion of the initial conditions in the Universe, though thisprospect warrants further investigation in simulations.