Understanding the physics of inflaton condensate fragmentation in the early Universe is crucial as the ex-istence of fragments in the form of non-topological solitons (oscillons or Q-balls) may potentially modify theevolution of the post-inflation Universe. Furthermore, such fragments may evolve into primordial black holesand form dark matter, or emit gravitational waves. Due to the non-perturbative and non-linear nature of thedynamics, most of the studies rely on numerical lattice simulations. Numerical simulations of condensate frag-mentation are, however, challenging, and, without knowing where to look in the parameter space, they are likelyto be time-consuming as well. In this paper, we provide generic analytical conditions for the perturbations of aninflaton condensate to undergo growth to non-linearity in the cases of both symmetric and asymmetric inflatonpotentials. We apply the conditions to various inflation models and demonstrate that our results are in goodagreement with explicit numerical simulations. Our analytical conditions are easy to use and may be utilisedin order to quickly identify models that may undergo fragmentation and determine conditions under they do so,which can guide subsequent in-depth numerical analyses.I. INTRODUCTION After inflation ends, a real scalar inflaton field starts to os-cillate around the minimum of its potential. An attractive in-flaton self-interaction may then result in growth of perturba-tions of the inflaton to non-linearity and, if non-topologicalsoliton (NTS) solutions exist, which will be the case in themodels we consider, subsequent fragmentation of the infla-ton condensate1. The inflaton condensate fragments corre-spond to oscillons, which are spherically symmetric quasi-stable NTS [ 1] . The longevity of oscillons can be understoodby the conservation of adiabatic charge [ 2] .The study of inflaton condensate fragmentation has gainedmuch attention partly due to the interesting consequences ofthe fragments. Examples include primordial black hole for-mation due to the statistics of fragments [ 3– 5], gravitationalwave signals associated with fragments [6 –9], and changes inreheating dynamics which lead to a different cosmic evolution[ 10, 11].The evolution dynamics of the fragments often requires nu-merical lattice simulations due to the non-perturbative andnon-linear nature. Most of the existing literature adapts nu-merical approaches and performs extensive lattice simula-tions. Numerical simulations are, however, often technicallychallenging and computationally demanding, and can obscurethe underlying physics. Furthermore, without knowing whereto look in the model parameter space, or if fragmentation is ∗ jinsu.kim@cern.ch† j.mcdonald@lancaster.ac.uk1 It is important to distinguish between the growth of perturbations of a scalar field to non-linearity and condensate fragmentation. The latter requires thatdiscrete NTS solutions exist, so that the condensate may break up into dis-crete NTS with vacuum between them. The condition for NTS to be pos-sible in models that grow to non-linearity is that the scalars are sufficientlymassive in the vacuum so that the energy per scalar in the NTS can be lessthan the mass of the scalar in the vacuum. This will be generally true of thepotentials that we will consider. even possible in a given model, numerical studies can be time-consuming. Having an analytical expression for the conditionunder which the condensate is likely to undergo non-lineargrowth and hence, if discrete NTS solutions exist, fragmen-tation, would be greatly beneficial for such in-depth numeri-cal analyses. Such a condition could serve as a starting pointof extensive numerical analyses, and it could also be used toquickly estimate the likelihood of fragmentation in a givenmodel. We expect that NTS will exist in the models thatwe consider, therefore, in the following, we will consider thegrowth of perturbations to non-linearity and fragmentation tobe equivalent.The aim of this paper is to provide general analytical condi-tions for perturbations of an inflaton condensate to grow to be-come non-linear and hence for inflaton condensate fragmenta-tion to be possible. In Ref. [12 ] we studied the stability of aninflaton condensate, based on Ref. [1 ], for the case of a generalsymmetric potential. We obtained analytical conditions on theself-interaction couplings under which the condensate under-goes fragmentation. However, the method of Ref. [ 12 ] cannotbe used when the potential is asymmetric. In this work, wegeneralise the analysis of Ref. [12 ] to encompass asymmetricpotentials, thus allowing the condition for fragmentation to bedetermined for a wide range of inflaton potentials.In the next section, we develop an analytical framework forstudying the growth of inflaton field perturbations and infla-ton condensate fragmentation. We then provide the analyticalconditions under which the condensate grows to non-linearityand fragments for both symmetric and asymmetric potentials.The main results of the paper are summarised in Sec. IID.In Sec. III, we apply our analytical results to four exam-ples for which numerical results are available: the α-attractorT-model, the α-attractor E-model, Starobinsky's R 2 model,and the Palatini R 2 model with a quadratic potential. In addi-tion, we apply our results to a model which has not yet beenstudied numerically, Higgs Inflation with a general symmetry-breaking potential in both the metric and Palatini formula-tions, and we perform lattice simulations to test our analyticalresults. We show that our results are in good agreement with arXiv:2111.12474v1 [astro-ph.CO] 24 Nov 2021 numerical simulations in all cases, thus demonstrating theirgeneral effectiveness.
In our analysis, we will be considering a potential that isclose to a quadratic potential, so to a first approximation, thefield will undergo coherent oscillations in a quadratic poten-tial. We expect that any potential that is capable of supportingNTS solutions will be approximately quadratic at the mini-mum of its potential, as it is necessary for the scalars to havea non-zero mass in the vacuum in order for the NTS solutionsto have a lower energy per scalar and so to be (meta)stable.
These are the main results of the paper.Strictly speaking, these conditions are sufficient conditionsfor fragmentation, as they show that if the condensate forms itwill fragments, hence fragmentation is guaranteed if our con-ditions are satisfied. In our analysis, we are restricting theinitial value of the field to be close enough to the minimum ofthe potential that the potential is dominated by the quadraticterm. However, it is possible that fragmentation could occurmore rapidly and at larger field values ​​due to tachyonic pre-heating, in which case it is possible that fragmentation couldstill occur even if our conditions are not satisfied. In prac-tice, as we will demonstrate via a range of examples below,we find that quite generally our conditions accurately predictthe conditions under which fragmentation occurs in numericalsimulations.In the next section we will apply our analytical conditionsto various examples of inflation models and compare themwith the known numerical results in order to demonstrate the effectiveness of our analytic fragmentation conditions.
In the previous sections we considered models for whicha numerical analysis of fragmentation already exists, and wedemonstrated that our simple analytical conditions can repro-duce the conditions for fragmentation that were previously ob-tained numerically. In this section, we consider examples forwhich no numerical analysis at present exists, namely HiggsInflation with a symmetry-breaking potential in both the met-ric and Palatini formalisms, where the inflaton is oscillatingaround the symmetry-breaking minimum of its potential. Wederive the analytical conditions for fragmentation and thenconfirm numerically that these conditions are correct.
In summary, we find significantly new results for the caseof metric and Palatini Higgs Inflation with a broken-symmetrypotential in the induced gravity limit, and for metric HiggsInflation with a broken-symmetry potential in the limit wherev> M P /(√6ξ), with all other cases reducing to a conventionalminimally coupled scalar with a symmetry-breaking potential.In particular, we find that fragmentation will occur for PalatiniHiggs Inflation in the induced gravity limit, but will not occurfor metric Higgs Inflation in this limit.To our knowledge, there is no numerical study of this par-ticular setup. In order to verify our analytical study, weperform numerical simulations in 1+3 dimensions by usingthe public lattice simulation code LATTICEEASY [25 ]. Wepresent results of numerical simulations for the following twocases.
In both cases, our analytical results predict that fragmenta-tion will occur. Note that, in the second case, the fragmenta-tion conditions are same in both formalisms as in this limitboth models reduce to a minimally coupled scalar with asymmetry-breaking potential, and there is no difference be-tween the formalisms.For the numerical simulation, we set N grid = 128 3 , L =50m −1 (30m −1 ), and δt = 0.1m −1 for the first (second) case,where m ≡√2λv. For both cases, we used the field value atthe end of inflation, Φ end = (M P /2√ξ)sinh −1 (4√2ξ) [ 23] ,as the initial condition. The result of the numerical simulationfor the case of ξv 2 /M 2 ≫ 1 is shown in Fig. 1. We presentthe energy density ρ/〈ρ〉 = 10, where 〈ρ〉 is the averaged en-ergy density over the lattice. In Fig. 2 , we plotted the energydensity ρ/〈ρ〉 = 10 for the case of ξv 2 /M 2 ≪ 1. We see thatthe inflaton condensate fragments after inflation ends in bothcases. Our analytical results are thus in agreement with thenumerical analysis. IV. CONCLUSION In this paper, we have derived general analytical conditionsunder which the inflaton condensate will fragment for the caseof both symmetric and asymmetric potentials. The robustnessof our results was demonstrated by applying our analyticalfragmentation conditions to a range of models for which theresult is known numerically, including the α-attractor T andE models, Starobinsky's R 2 model, and the Palatini R 2 modelwith a quadratic potential. In all cases, we find that the ana-lytically predicted condition on the model parameters for frag-mentation to occur are in complete agreement with the resultsof the numerical analyses.In addition, we have applied our results to Higgs Inflationwith a broken-symmetry potential in both the metric and Pala-tini formulations and derived a general condition for fragmen-tation to occur in these models. We then carried out numer-ical simulations of these models using LATTICEEASY andfound complete agreement between our analytical predictionsfor fragmentation to occur and the results of the numericalsimulations.The conditions we have derived provide a quick and sim-ple method to check whether any model that can support non-topological soliton solutions (which requires that the scalarshave a mass at the potential minimum and therefore that thepotential is approximately quadratic at the minimum) will un-dergo fragmentation and to determine the range of model pa-rameters for which this is possible.The physics of the inflaton condensate fragmentation hasmany interesting phenomenological consequences, includingthe formation of primordial black holes and gravitational wavesignals. The evolution dynamics generally requires extensivenumerical lattice simulations. We believe that our findingsmay serve as a starting point for such numerical analyses.