Propagation of light in the universe can be affected by several phe-nomena, eg gravitational field generated by massive objects. Anexample of such phenomena is gravitational lensing, which providesa powerful tool in studying matter distributions throughout the Uni-verse (eg Schneider et al. 2006 ). In addition to gravitational lensing,inhomogeneous distributions of free electrons can cause deflectionof light rays as well, called plasma lensing (eg Clegg et al . 1998 ; Tuntsov et al . 2016 ; Cordes et al . 2017 ). Plasma lensing shares sev- eral similar features with gravitational lensing, especially in termsof the mathematical description. However, different features intro-duced by plasma lensing (such as wavelength dependence) becomesignificant only at low frequency, eg usually in the radio band.Moreover, the deflection caused by plasma lensing is opposite to thedeflection due to gravitational lensing, which makes an over-denseclump of plasma to act as a diverging lens. Observations of plasmalensing began with the discovery of wild changes in the flux den-sity of compact radio sources (Fiedler et al . 1987), a phenomenonknown as Extreme Scattering Events (ESEs). Although a detailedphysical picture of the phenomenon remains elusive, it is believedthat wavelength-dependent refraction due to plasma along the line ofsight in an ESE cannot be neglected. Since the introduction of theGaussian plasma lens model, it has been widely used to describe thephenomenon (Romani et al. 1987 ; Clegg et al . 1998 ).Millisecond duration pulses, known as fast radio bursts ★ Email: phioen@163.com (Lorimer et al. 2007 ; Cordes & Chatterjee 2019 ; Petroff et al . 2019 ),are dispersed during propagating in the ionised gas of the interstel-lar and intergalactic media. Several observational aspects of FRBsare modulated by plasma lensing, such as the dispersion relationand amplitude. The cosmological origin of FRBs provide a potentialprobe to study the total integrated column density of free electronsalong the line of sight. Studies of the baryon fraction in the inter-galactic medium using FRBs with redshift have been recently intro-duced in the literature (eg Macquart et al. 2020 ; James et al. 2021 ).However, the frequency-time delay relation (ie the Dispersion Mea-sure, DM), is not an exact estimate of the projected electron density(eg Kulkarni 2020 ; Er et al . 2020; Ocker et al . 2021 ). Moreover,it has been noted that plasma lensing is responsible for both mag-nification and strong de-magnification of background sources fromboth observations (eg Clegg et al . 1998) and analytical models (eg Tuntsov et al . 2016 ; Er & Rogers 2018 ). The diverging properties of plasma lensing deflects radio signals that would otherwise bereceived by us without a plasma clump along the line of sight. There-fore, the probability of detecting background sources is modified bythe existence of plasma lenses. The distribution of the observed back-ground sources will not be uniform, and will always appear biasedtoward the low density region of the plasma clumps. With such a bi-ased tracer, one expects another systematic error in the estimation ofthe electron density in addition to all the other uncertainties alreadymentioned. In this study, we perform a toy simulation to evaluatethe effect of such a systematic density bias, neglecting all the otheruncertainties. We briefly summarise the basics of plasma lensing inSect. 2 and discuss the lensing cross section for magnification and © 202x The Authors
Page 2
2Er et al. de-magnification in Sect. 3. A toy simulation to evaluate the bias inestimating the electron density is presented in Sect. 4. Finally wediscuss our results in Sect. 5. We adopt the standard ΛCDM cos-mology with parameters based on the results from the Planck 2018(Planck Collaboration et al . 2020 ): Ω Λ = 0.6847, Ω = 0.315, andHubble constant 0 = 100ℎ km s −1 Mpc −1 with ℎ = 0.674.
THE BASICS OF PLASMA LENSINGThe description of plasma lensing follows from gravitational lensing,eg Schneider et al. (2006 ). One can also find details from, eg, Tuntsov et al. (2016 ); Cordes et al. (2017); Er & Rogers (2018 ). The lens is approximated as thin and the deflection angles are assumedto be small. We consider a source at angular position on the sourceplane with respect to the line of sight. The corresponding image ofthis source is then formed at the angular position on the observer'ssky. For simplicity we only consider axisymmetric lens models. Thelens equation can be thus related by the deflection angle.
Two analytical toy models are adopted to describe the numberdensity of electrons. The first is the widely used Gaussian model(eg Clegg et al . 1998 ; Cordes et al . 2017), which can also serve asa building block for constructing more complicated density profiles.The second profile we consider is a power-law model, of which thelensing properties can be calculated analytically as well. Moreover,the maximum density gradient of the power-law lens model, whichdepends on the power-law index, can be much higher than that of aGaussian profile even with a low average density. It is thus interestingto explore both profiles as they can be adopted for different scenarios.A Gaussian random field model provides a good description of theKolmogorov spectrum of electron densities (eg Cordes et al . 2016),which will be studied in a future work.
We evaluate the ratio 0 /, and in Fig. 1 show the image-sourcepositions, as well as the magnification curves on the image andsource planes, respectively. The image and source coordinates arenormalised by the lens width. In the left panel, peaks and valleysof all the curves appear at similar image positions, and they allapproach the identity= after about = 4. That gives similarradial positions for the critical curves, where the magnification curvesof super-critical lenses peak around ∼and 3 (middle panel). Inthe right panel, the magnification as a function of the source positionis shown. In the region where the curve corresponds to more thanone magnification, multiple imaging occurs, eg in the pink shaderegion, three images are generated by the red curve lens.For a super critical lens (ie more than one caustic is generatedby the lens), inside the inner caustic, only one image is formed bythe lens with extremely de-magnification (≪ 1). Thus once asource is located inside the inner caustic, we have low probability todetect any signal, and we call this region as “forbidden”. As 0 /increases, the inner caustic (which indicates the forbidden region)slowly moves outwards. In contrast, the position of the outer causticmoves outwards more rapidly, and the area between the two causticsgrows. However, this does not have strong significance, because atlarge radii, the magnifications of the first image is close to unity,and those of the second and third images are extremely small (ie theimages are strongly de-magnified and have a low probability of beingobserved). One can see this from the magnification curves in the pinkshaded region in Fig. 1. In fact, the possible positions to detect twoimages is around the inner caustic, where the second image is onlyslightly de-magnified.
In Fig. 4, we show the lensing cross section as a function of theparameter ratio. For the Gaussian model, the rate of increase of thede-magnification becomes slightly slower after crit , while for a SPLmodel, such a change does not appear. The magnification curve issomewhat complicated. A small transition appears at crit as well. Thedramatic change appears after 0 / ∼ 2.1, where the outer causticmoves outward rapidly. When the ratio becomes sufficiently large, ie 0 / ∼ 3.7, the probability of magnification decreases. The reason is that in some area between the two peaks, the magnification is below1.05 and will be excluded, eg see the red curve in Fig. 3. However,for a lens with high 0 /, the high probability of magnificationdoes not suggest lensing strength as one can see that most of themagnification in the cross section is only slightly larger than unity.For the SPL lens, the probability of both effects is similar as thatof Gaussian lens, ie increases with the ratio as well. The slope ofmagnification curve is larger between 0 / ∼ [2.6, 3.1]. After that,there is a small decrease. It is the same as that for the Gaussian model,in some area between the two peaks, the magnification is below 1.05.In order to compare the lensing efficiency of the two profiles, weshow the corresponding parameter ratios of the other profile usingEq. 18 at the top x-axis in each panel of Fig. 4.4 MAGNIFICATION EFFECTSIt has been proposed to use radio pulsing sources to trace the ionisedbaryons throughout the universe. The relation of the Dispersion Mea-sure to electron density, however, relies on several assumptions andapproximations (eg Kulkarni 2020). For example, the contributionfrom ions is not included; the temperature of the plasma is assumedto be low, and the effect of magnetic field in plasma is not takeninto account. Moreover, it is necessary to assume a uniform spatialdistribution of the background radio sources. In gravitational lens-ing, the cosmic magnification effect can be used to study the matterdistribution on large scales, but the inhomogeneous distribution ofbackground sources has to be taken into account, (eg Zhang & Pen 2005 ). A significant difference of plasma lensing is that it can cause strong de-magnification to the source (even for the brightest primaryimage), which therefore cannot be observed at all. Thus, the informa-tion we extract from observations of radio sources will be in principleincomplete, a distinct conclusion compared to gravitational lensing.Such a “selection effect” can lead to a systematic bias in the estimateof the electron density.We perform a toy simulation to evaluate the magnification effectof plasma lensing. For simplicity, we adopt the redshift of a repeatingFRB (≈ 0.2, Spitler et al . 2016) for all of our sources. Addition-ally, we place all the plasma clumps in the Milky Way in order toavoid the redshift effect to the estimate of electron density (Ioka 2003 ; Inoue 2004 ). The observation frequency we adopted is = 1 GHz. A realistic model of the electron density on small scales is difficultto obtain, either from observations or simulations. We thus adopt asimple model and restrict the electron density in the range consistentwith observations (eg Cordes & Lazio 2002 , 2003; Yao et al. 2017).An axisymmetric Gaussian density model is used for all the plasmaclumps in the tests in whichlenses are randomly and uniformlyplaced in a field of 1 × 1 arcmin 2. The lens widthfollows a log-normal distribution. The central density of the lens is sampled bytwo constraints: i) for eachthe ratio 0 / follows a log-normaldistribution, the mean value of the distribution is 0.05 if is greaterthan 1 arcsec, and is 0.25 ifis smaller than 1 arcsec, ii) 0 <1arcsec to avoid an extremely large electron density (the corresponding 0 is about 2600 pc cm −3 ). In Fig. 5, we present the distributions of 0 ,and 0 / of ourmock lens samples. Most of the lenses have small density and size.We calculate the magnification analytically or using finite difference.The plasma lens potential is calculated from the stacked electrondensity of all the lenses on a mesh with resolution of 0.24 arcsec.The lensing properties, such as magnification can be performed byusing the method in Bradač et al. (2005 ). We regard the region where<0.25 as “unobservable” on the lens plane, ie the deflectioncaused by the lens is not taken into account. The threshold of beingunobservable depends on the condition of observations. In reality,∼ 0.25 is only a rough estimate of the forbidden regions. Onecan see from the figures of magnification curves (Fig. 3) that oncethe lens becomes critical, the magnification inside the caustic isextremely small around the lens centre. We also perform additionaltests to calculate regions for<0.1. The area of ​​the unobservableregions decrease by only 10 − 20%, which is mainly caused by thesub-critical lenses. This will not change our conclusions substantially,but warrants a more detailed study with observational constraints inthe future.We mask out the unobservable regions on the lens plane, andobtain results to compare with those using all the simulated data. InFig. 6, we present one example of the density map of e . One is theinitial simulated map of the electron density, the other is the mapwe mark out the exclusion regions, which is shown by red colour.Most of the exclusion regions are located at high density region. Butnot all the high density regions are strongly de-magnified, since thegradient of density is another important factor as well.We compare the average electron density over the whole field(label as true) and over the field without the exclusion regions (labelas estimated). 500 realisations are simulated to show the differencein Fig. 7. The distributions with or without the exclusion regionsshow difference, which becomes significant with the increase of thenumber of lenses. With a higher electron density, the cross sectionof the exclusion region grows, and the probability of detecting alower electron density becomes greater.
We show the relative difference in Table 1. From both Fig. 7 andTable 1, one can see that the “estimated” density from mock obser-vations will be lower than the “real” one. With an increase in theelectron density (ie, the number of lenses in front of the field), theunderestimate becomes larger. As one expects that the density gra-dient is another important aspect, we perform additional simulationswith higher gradient (the mean value of 0 / changes to 0.05, 0.5of the two log-normal distributions in the simulation, and the distri-bution of 0 / is shown by the red curve in Fig. 5). The comparisonis presented by the bottom three rows in Table. 1. The underestimatebecomes slightly stronger with the similar electron density. In Fig. 8,we present of ¯ e , is estimated by the average and the error barspresent the standard deviation over 500 realisations. 
Inhomogeneous distributions of plasma can deflect the propagation oflow-frequency radio signals, similar to the gravitational lensing phe-nomena. This plasma lensing shares several similarities with gravi-tational lensing, especially in terms of the mathematical description.However, for an over-dense clump of plasma, it behaves analogouslyto a concave lens. The plasma lens thus diverges the light of back-ground sources and produces significant de-magnification. We studythe de-magnifying properties, and the cross section for two densityprofiles: the Gaussian model and the softened power-law model.The properties of the magnification and de-magnification of Gaus-sian plasma lenses can be determined by the ratio of lens parameters 0 /. The cross sections of magnifications increase with this ratio. Softened power-law lenses can be described by 0 /, and its crosssections increase with ratio as well. Since plasma lensing causesa strong de-magnification, ie→ 0, there will be two observa-tional consequences: 1) the luminosity function of the backgroundsources is modified by plasma lensing. 2) in the study of using dis-tant radio sources to trace the distribution of electron density in theuniverse, there is a bias: when the electron density is high and hasa large gradient, we cannot receive any radio signal. Therefore, theaverage electron density that we estimate will always be lower thantheir true mean value. We use a toy model in a small field of view(1 × 1 arcmin 2 ), a reasonable electron density range from observa-tions (Yao et al . 2017), and compare the simulated and the estimatedelectron density. Underestimates are obtained in all our tests. Themagnitude of the bias is correlated with several properties: the num-ber of lenses, the density model, and the density parameter, eg 0 /etc. In general, the higher the electron density, the larger the bias.From the observed electron density within the Milky Way, eg upto ∼ 2000 pc cm 3 along the disk(Yao et al . 2017 ), the underestimatecan be up to 15% in our test using the Gaussian density model whenthe lensing probability is≈ 10% (see Eq. 21). We also calculatethe luminosity function after plasma lensing, and find that the distri-bution of the flux of background sources can be broadened to bothhigher and lower values. One interesting point is that most of thehigh flux samples are magnified by lensing.Our study is simplified in several aspects. First of all, the plasmalensing is frequency dependent. We adopt = 1 GHz in our study.In reality, for observations with lower frequency, plasma lensing ef-fects will become even stronger. By comparing observations, egluminosity function at different frequencies, one can obtain tighterconstraints on both the plasma density and the background sources.Another two of simplifications are the model of electron density andthe luminosity function of the radio sources. The constraint on theelectron density is weak from observations so far, especially on smallscales. One will be able to rely on high resolution numerical sim-ulations, which have been undergoing rapid improvement in recentyears. Interests in the luminosity function have experienced explosivegrowths thanks to the observations of FRBs. We expect that thou-sands of FRBs will be detected in the coming years. The collectivestudy of many sources affected by foreground lenses (eg by varia-tions in the local electron density or by cosmic re-ionisation) will bedramatically improved to high precision. Under such conditions themagnification effect due to plasma lensing will present a systematicbias and will need to be accounted for.