The largest temperature anisotropy in the cosmic microwave background (CMB) is thedipole. The simplest interpretation of the dipole is that it is due to our motion withrespect to the rest frame of the CMB. As well as creating the l=1 mode of the CMBsky, this motion affects all astrophysical observations by modulating and aberratingsources across the sky. It can be seen in galaxy clustering, and in principle its timederivative through a dipole-shaped acceleration pattern in quasar positions. Addition-ally, the dipole modulates the CMB temperature anisotropies with the same frequencydependence as the thermal Sunyaev-Zeldovich (tSZ) effect and so these modulated CMBanisotropies can be extracted from the tSZ maps produced by Planck. Unfortunately thismeasurement cannot determine if the dipole is due to our motion, but it does provide anindependent measure of the dipole and a validation of the y maps. This measurement,and a description of the first-order terms of the CMB dipole, are outlined here.Keywords: Cosmic Microwave Background; Cosmic Microwave Background dipole; Spe-cial relativity; Thermal Sunyaev-Zeldovich effect. 1. The CMB Sky from PlanckPlancka was a space-based telescope that measured the microwave sky in nine wave-bands, allowing it to capture not only the cosmic microwave background (CMB) butalso several Galactic and extragalactic foreground components. This is most clearlyseen in figure 51 from Ref. 1, which shows the various wavebands of the Plancksatellite and the frequency spectra of the foreground signals across those bands.One signal of interest to this study is the thermal Sunyaev-Zeldovich (tSZ) effect,which produces so-called y-type distortion signals. This comes from CMB photonsbeing inverse-Compton scattered, mostly through hot galaxy clusters, which makesholes (or lowers the flux) at low frequencies and up-scatters (or makes an excessflux) at high frequencies. This signal allows us to construct a novel and independentmeasure of the CMB dipole because temperature anisotropies stemming from theCMB dipole contaminate the y maps. It can also be used as a valuable test of thequality of the y maps. We will start in Sec. 2 by setting out relevant notation forthe unboosted CMB sky. Next, in Sec. 3 we will boost the CMB sky, and explore a Planck ( http://www.esa.int/Planck) is a project of the European Space Agency (ESA) with instruments provided by two scientific consortia funded by ESA member states and led by PrincipalInvestigators from France and Italy, telescope reflectors provided through a collaboration betweenESA and a scientific consortium led and funded by Denmark, and additional contributions fromNASA (USA). arXiv:2111.12186v1 [astro-ph.CO] 23 Nov 2021
Page 2
November 25, 2021 1:36ws-procs961x669WSPC Proceedings-9.61in x 6.69inmain page 2 2 the relevant terms that arise from that boost in the subsections. Of particular rel-evance, in Sec. 3. 3 we will discuss our measurement of the dipole modulation termsthat mix with the tSZ effect. We will finish in Sec. 4 with a short discussion andconclusion regarding our work.2. The Unboosted CMB skyTo derive the connection between the y map and the dipole we will begin by definingsome useful terms regarding the unboosted CMB sky.
These are the dimensionless frequency, the standard Planck blackbody intensityfunction, the frequency dependence of the CMB anisotropies and the relative fre-quency dependence of the tSZ effect or y type distortions, respectively. Thus, tofirst order the anisotropies of intensity measured by Planck can be written.
The first line has the same frequency dependence as thermal fluctuations and soappear in typical CMB temperature anisotropy maps. Crucially for our analysis,the middle line has the same frequency dependence as y-type distortions and thusdescribes the signals in the y map. The final line has more obscure frequencydependence and is not discussed here. 
The second term in the first line of Eq. 6 is the dipole aberration and modulation ofthe temperature anisotropies of the CMB. The modulation causes the temperatureanisotropies to be brighter in the forwards direction, and dimmer in the reversedirection. The aberration causes the anisotropies to be more condensed in theforwards direction, and more stretched out in the reverse direction (effectively theL = AS. 1 lensing Same). Effects THESE TWO CAN BE Seen in Fig. 2 . This WAS First Effectmeasured in Ref. 9 to about 4 σThe second line of Eq. 6 shows the dipole-generated signals in the y maps producedby Planck. The first half is the same modulation and aberration terms as were seenin the temperature anisotropies; however, the final term is due to the second-orderexpansion of the intensity about T CMB and adds a contribution to the y maps fromthe temperature anisotropies.We can look for this signal by cross-correlating a template map, derived fromthe CMB temperature data, with ay map. To this end, we use the so-called 2D-ILCCMB temperature map which was produced by the “Constrained ILC” component-separation method designed by Ref. 10 to explicitly null out the contribution fromthe y-type spectral distortions in the CMB map. We also use the SMICA-NOSZtemperature map, similarly produced with the express intent of removing the y-typespectral distortions, and which was generated for the Planck 2018 data release 11 .Likewise, we use the corresponding 2D-ILC y map, and the Planck MILCA y map,which explicitly null out the contributions from a (differential) blackbody spectraldistribution in the y map 12, 13. If we multiply our CMB map with βµ and cross-correlate that with our tSZ map, then we can directly probe the dipole modulation.In Ref. 9 a quadratic estimator was used to determine the dipole aberration andmodulation, in essence using the auto-correlation of the CMB fluctuation temper-ature maps. In this work we use the fact that we know the true CMB fluctuationswith excellent precision and therefore know the signal that should be present in they map. Thus, we fully exploit the angular dependence of the modulation signal andremove much of the cosmic variance that would be present in the auto-correlation.In order to implement this idea we define three templates,.
Our y simulations are generated by first computing the power spectra of ourdata y maps; specifically we apply the MASTER method using the NaMASTER rou-tine 14 to account for the applied mask 15. Then we generate y maps using thispower-spectrum with the HEALPix 16 routine synfast. We finally apply a Gaussiansmoothing of 5 to model the telescope beam. For each analysis method we esti-mate the amplitude of the dipole (ˆβ i ) in each of the three orthogonal directions.We apply the same analysis procedure on a suite of 1000 y simulations, generatedwith and without the dipolar modulation term.
Conclusion: Distinguishing Intrinsic and Extrinsic CMBDipolesThe frequency-dependent part of the dipolar-modulation signal is agnostic to thesource of the large CMB dipole. Therefore, its measurement is an independentdetermination of the CMB dipole. While it may be tempting to use this signalto distinguish an intrinsic dipole, it has been shown that an intrinsic dipole and adipole induced by a velocity boost would in fact have the same dipolar-modulationsignature on the sky20 ,21Due to the existence of the CMB dipole, a tSZ map necessarily contains a con-taminating signal that is simply the dipole modulation of the CMB anisotropies.This occurs because CMB experiments do not directly measure temperatureanisotropies, but instead measure intensity variations that are conventionally con-verted to temperature variations. This contamination adds power to the tSZ map ina Y 20 pattern, with its axis parallel to the dipole direction. We have measured thiseffect and determined a statistically independent value of the CMB dipole, which isconsistent with direct measurements of the dipole. Using a conservative multipole cut on the y map, the significance of the detection of the dipole modulation signalis around 5 or 6 σ, depending on the precise choice of data set and analysis method.The question as to whether an intrinsic dipole could ever be observationally dis-tinguished from an extrinsic dipole (ie a Doppler boost) remains an open question.The terms discussed in Eq. 6 are based on the assumption of a CMB blackbodyspectrum and cannot be used to distinguish the two, as they would naturally arisewhether the CMB dipole is caused by a boost, or if there is for some other reasona dipole on the sky with the same magnitude and direction.AcknowledgementsWe would like to acknowledge the support of the Natural Sciences and EngineeringResearch Council of Canada. Some of the results in this paper have been derivedusing the HEALPix package. Results are based on observations obtained with Planck( http://www.esa.int/Planck) , an ESA science mission with instruments and contri-butions directly funded by ESA Member States, NASA, and Canada. We wouldalso like to thank Dagoberto Contreras for collaboration on topics within this paper.